OEP-65: Composable Micro-frontends (#575)
openedx/open-edx-proposals: oeps/architectural-decisions/oep-0065-frontend-composability.rst

Full Page Refreshes
-------------------

Each MFE has its own index.html page, and needs to load all its own dependencies from scratch whenever you navigate to it.  This means that the browser performs a full page refresh each time a user transfers from MFE to MFE.

Build time
----------

Each MFE must bundle all its own dependencies at build time, creating significant overhead for the webpack build process.  When building multiple MFEs, this additional, repeated overhead becomes prohibitively onerous.

Dependency Maintenance
----------------------

Since each MFE has its own complete set of dependencies, the overhead of keeping them all up to date can be overwhelming.  Security patches, bug fixes, new features, and breaking changes all add up and create a significant maintenance burden.

Composability
=============

We have no clean, low-overhead way of composing components from multiple MFEs into a single page, or extending an MFE with additional functionality.

> The reality of MFEs is that while each application may represent a cohesive domain or bounded context, sometimes you need content and functionality from more than one domain on the page at the same time.

Reviewer: I would add a particular use case explicitly: that of the provider who wants to show different MFEs to different classes of user (part of both the customizability and multi-tenancy stories), while keeping the rest of the app (header, navigation, other MFEs/plugins on the page) unchanged.

Author: Believe I've addressed this with the paragraph below.

Shared Libraries (Current Option #1)
------------------------------------

Because each MFE is siloed from each other - both in repositories and at runtime - our only viable mechanism for sharing code has historically been to extract it into a shared library that gets bundled with each at build time.  This creates more repository/dependency overhead.

> Frontend Plugins (Curent Option #2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Frontend Plugins (Current Option #2)
```

- Enforces consistency across all types of dependencies
- Reduces runtime bundle size

Note that "build time" and "dependency maintenance" are not mentioned above.

Interestingly, because of the way webpack module federation's dependency sharing is implemented, this may not have a large impact on build time or dependency maintenance, as "guest" MFEs still need to have the dependencies installed for the build to succeed, and artifacts for them will still be created - they just won't be used at runtime.  Using webpack externals instead of module federation ensures that the dependencies won't be bundled/part of the build, but they still need to be dev dependencies in the repository for IDE hinting, auto completion, linting, etc.

Enforcing Dependency Consistency
================================

This proposal fundamentally changes how we work with MFE dependencies, and will require us to adopt a more rigorous approach to ensuring dependency consistency and compatiblity.

We expect that this may need to take a number of possible forms:

- Process to ensure maintainers and developers know what dependency versions to use, and when they need to upgrade to stay consistent.

> - Process to migrate through breaking changes in third-party dependencies.

Reviewer: Context for reviewers: we already have a de-facto process (say, for [Node 20](https://github.com/openedx/public-engineering/issues/229)).  We might just need to document it better or tool it up so it's a bit less clunky.

Author: Oh - let me know if there's something I could link to here.  Hadn't thought of that.

Author: I've added a link to the Upgrade Project Runbook here.

> - Best practices to ensure we minimize breaking changes in our own libraries (such as Paragon).

Reviewer: We should already be doing that, but after this there'll be a more pressing reason for it, indeed.

Author: I've added some specific recommendations around this.

- Tooling to warn maintainers/developers of inconsistencies.

> - A more drastic code organization scheme, such as a monorepo, which provides shared dependencies to core applications and libraries via a common package.json file.

Author: I feel like we've never actually _used_ the Github releases for more than viewing release notes... my hot take is that we wouldn't miss it. 🤔

> - A more drastic code organization scheme, such as a monorepo, which provides shared dependencies to core applications and libraries via a common package.json file.

Author: I've added monorepos as an explicit "Rejected Alternative", so I think we can probably close this thread.

Frontend Plugins (Current Option #3)
------------------------------------

With the creation of the `frontend-plugin-framework <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-plugin-framework>`_, we're starting to have the capability to share components across MFEs as plugins, either at build time (direct plugins) or runtime (iframe plugins)

Direct plugins create some flexibility, but couple our repositories' builds together. Iframes are good for sandboxing and isolating code, but they're a very inefficient way to compose a UI, especially given the consistency and UX/DX concerns raised above. In a way, they exacerbate the problem even more. There's no way to do direct plugins via the MFE config API, since they rely on importing modules directly into the build.

Specification
************

Fundamentally, runtime module loading and shared dependencies address the majority of these problems, so our approach centers on enabling these two things.

> Both are the primary value proposition of module federation. Module federation is an advanced technique designed specifically for use cases like ours, and encompasses a few related ideas. It can be accomplished manually by leveraging Webpack externals, via Webpack module federation, or other similar mechanisms in other bundlers/module loaders, such as rspack and System.js.

Reviewer 2: At some point in this document we should link to the upstream docs: https://webpack.js.org/concepts/module-federation/
As a frontend ignoramus I had not realized just by reading this OEP that Webpack module federation is a concept that already exists outside of the Open edX world.

Reviewer 3: Personally I don't like the term "module federation" as an umbrella term for this initiative, because it's webpack-specific and kind of vague. There are various terms but they're all build around the concept of [dynamic import](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/import) which is now built into the JavaScript language, and when used with a bundler like webpack, Vite, etc. facilitates "lazy loading", "code splitting", and "dependency optimization" in the resulting bundle(s).

I think "runtime module loading" as written two lines above is a much better name. Or even "runtime module loading and shared dependencies" if necessary :p

Author: (Hear you loud and clear @regisb - I'll make that clearer)

FWIW, "module federation" first entered our vernacular as a plugin added to webpack, but that [implementation](https://module-federation.io/) has since been pulled out of webpack so that it can be bundler agnostic.  rspack, for instance, uses the same implementation as webpack now, from what I understand.  

I think what we want is composability, and that's what the OEP should be (and is) titled.  I think the way we do that is module federation - which I don't consider to be webpack-specific - which this PR and the OEP mention as an approach, and the implementation is likely via webpack, with respect to our separate Vite conversations. 😄 

I tried to thread the needle between these terms in here, but you both have shown me it could use some clarifying. :)

Author: Okay, I rewrote this whole section to try to be a lot clearer about the approach/implementation/etc.  I took @bradenmacdonald's advice and tried to use "runtime module loading" more frequently, except when I'm talking specifically about implementing that via webpack module federation.  Let me know what you both think.

Reviewer 3: Thanks - I think it's definitely more clear now.

We've chosen to proceed with Webpack module federation. It provides flexibility in terms of how it resolves incompatibilities, enforcement of 'singletons', and a module loading lifecycle that supports extensions to the module federation system itself. Further, we already use Webpack, so the work to add it to our configurations is small.

Runtime Module Loading
======================

> The capability to lazily load content from a different, independently built MFEs into the page - without iframes - solves a few of the issues mentioned above. In particular, it gives us a way of composing UI elements from different MFEs/Domains dynamically at runtime without a "host" application needing to know anything about the "guest" at build time. The two remain completely decoupled, save some shared runtime configuration.

Author: I tidied this up!

This capability has a high degree of overlap with the goals of the frontend-plugin-framework (FPF), and was the inspiration and approach for the original POC for that framework. We expect that the FPF would add a new plugin type - probably "module plugin" - which handles loading plugins via Webpack module federation.

Runtime module loading improves:

- Frequency of full page refreshes

> - Composability across MFEs/domains

Author: I put some more detail in there. 👍🏻

> - Runtime extensiblity

Author: I tried to add some clarity here. 👍🏻

It also helps preserve the independent deployability and autonomy of our MFEs.

Shared Dependencies
===================

Going along with runtime module loading is the ability to share dependencies between MFEs. This is another core capability of Webpack module federation.

> As noted above, MFEs have a number of dependencies which are common between them, but which aren't actually shared at runtime in any way. The capability to share these dependencies - such as ``react``, ``@openedx/paragon``, etc. - would mitigate a great deal of our inconsistency and UX/DX issues.

Reviewer 4: I think it'd be nice to call out the specific UX issues here.

* Stuff looks different between different MFEs
  * Caused by different versions of dependencies in different MFEs. This could be solved *without module federation* by enforcing dependency versions be the same across MFEs (this could be as low tech as having a spreadsheet of MFEs and not cutting a release until all of them are using the same version of header/footer)
* Loading a page with a new MFE means loading all those dependencies again
  * Caused by having each MFE be a standalone webapp. Fixing this *requires* architectural changes
  
While the new architecture solves both problems in "one fell swoop" so to speak, I think it'd be nice address each separately in this document.

Author: I'm adding some links back up to the Motivation section here... feel like we should describe the problems up there and just reference them here.

     - 241.1k
     -
   * - prop-types
     - 0.9k
     -
   * - react
     - 6.4k
     -
   * - react-dom
     - 130.2k
     -
   * - react-redux
     - 11.2k
     -
   * - react-router
     - 58.9k
     -
   * - react-router-dom
     - 77.1k
     -
   * - redux
     - 3.7k
     - Ultimately should be replaced with @reduxjs/toolkit. This document isn't making a judgment on the utility of redux, just noting that it is currently in use in the vast majority of MFEs.
   * - regenerator-runtime
     - 6.6k
     -

Total size: ~2,087.2k unzipped

Sharing these dependencies has several important positive effects:

- Enforces runtime consistency across all types of dependencies
- Reduces runtime bundle size

Note that "build time" and "dependency maintenance" are not mentioned above.

Interestingly, because of the way Webpack module federation's dependency sharing is implemented, this may not have a large impact on build time or dependency maintenance. "Guest" MFEs still need to have the dependencies installed for the build to succeed, and artifacts for them will still be created and deployed - they just won't generally be used at runtime unless there's a version conflict.

> These dependencies still need to exist in the package.json file (and be installed by npm) for the build to succeed, and for IDE hinting, auto completion, linting, etc.

Reviewer 4: > artifacts for them will still be created and deployed - they just won't generally be used at runtime unless there's a version conflict.

It's not obvious to me how this works. I assume there are docs that explain this somewhere, maybe linking to those here would be helpful?

Reviewer 3: Yep, and this seems to conflict with what's below.

To me, "they just won't generally be used at runtime unless there's a version conflict." implies that every MFE _can_ use different versions of dependencies and they'll be de-duplicated in a smart way - if MFE A uses Paragon 25, it gets Paragon 25, while if MFEs B and C both use Paragon 24.x.x (say, different but compatible minor releases), then MFEs B and C will transparently use a common Paragon module at runtime. I think that sounds great.

But the rest of this text seems to imply "we have to force all of our MFEs to keep their dependencies versioned in lock-step or module federation won't work" which sounds less than ideal.

Reviewer 4: It is touched on at the very end

https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/blob/7f887a97ed345642ba8ed198258ff3a662718186/oeps/architectural-decisions/oep-0065-frontend-composability.rst?plain=1#L350-L351

but I think touching on it earlier and linking out to docs with more details would help provide context

Author: I've tried to simplify and clarify this section, and reference further down in the doc where there's a link to more details.  It may be that it still needs a diagram to be clear; let me know what y'all think.

Maintaining Dependency Consistency
==================================

This proposal fundamentally changes how we work with MFE dependencies, and will require us to adopt a more rigorous approach to ensuring dependency consistency and compatiblity.

We expect that this may need to take a number of possible forms:

Process
-------

We need to ensure maintainers and developers know what dependency versions to use, and when they need to upgrade to stay consistent. We also need a process to migrate through breaking changes in third-party dependencies.

Best Practices
--------------

> We need to ensure we minimize breaking changes in our own libraries (such as Paragon).

Reviewer 3: Paragon is a tough one... it's still pretty immature in some places and there's definitely going to be a tradeoff here between stability and development velocity.

Author: One approach we tried (or maybe only considered?) with Paragon once upon a time was to just create new versions of components when a breaking change is strictly necessary, i.e., you end up with `ButtonV2`.  We could retire deprecated components with the DEPR process aligned to platform releases or something, rather than having random major version bumps whenever it's convenient.

One way or another, I think we need to get really strict about breaking changes in our libraries, like, paragon and frontend-platform, or this gets way harder.

Author: I've added some specific recommendations around maintaining dependency consistency, akin to what I wrote here.

Tooling
-------

Maintainers and developers should be warned of incompatibilities created by their PRs, or outside the repository by another project (such as the shell).

Code Organization
-----------------

We could adopt a more drastic code organization scheme, such as a monorepo, which provides shared dependencies to core applications and libraries via a common package.json file, while otherwise maintaining applications' independent deployability.

> Alternately, we could create a new, versioned shared library which provides shared dependencies to MFE repositories as a single dependency (TBD how that would work).  This library could be paired with webpack aliases to prevent MFEs from needing to update their library import paths.

Reviewer 4: We already do a little of this with `frontend-build`/`frontend-platform`, I could see having a `frontend-kitchensink` package as the *only* dependency in the `package.json` in every MFE as a (perhaps a bit overzealous) way to enforce dependency consistency between MFEs.

Reviewer 4: > allow each MFE to select which major version of frontend-platform it uses

The issue there would come from [singletons](https://webpack.js.org/plugins/module-federation-plugin#singleton)

> #### `singleton`
> `boolean`
>
> This hint only allows a single version of the shared module in the shared scope (disabled by default). Some libraries use a global internal state (e.g. react, react-dom). Thus, it is critical to have only one instance of the library running at a time.

So if `react` made it into `frontend-platform` we'd need to *require* all MFEs use the same major version of `frontend-platform` for module federation to work.

Maybe it'd make sense to have 2 sets for each major release - the "this needs to be the same as the rest of the MFEs" set, and the "this can be upgraded independently" set?

Reviewer 3: My understanding was that [as of React 17 you could have multiple versions of React in the same app](https://legacy.reactjs.org/blog/2020/10/20/react-v17.html#gradual-upgrades). Of course it's inefficient, but it's possible.

And in any case, React 17 and 18 are so similar and compatible that I don't anticipate that being a huge barrier; upgrading React 17 to 18 is usually simple. My concern would be more with Paragon (and in turn bootstrap) which relies on global [S]CSS rules (and maybe global JS too?). I don't think Paragon uses scoped CSS classes, so although you can have several different versions rendering your components, you have to pick which version gets to provide the CSS for the whole app - and then some of the components rendered by other versions may be broken. But this is challenging because (A) Paragon still needs a lot of development, and (B) when Paragon does introduce breaking changes it can require a lot of work to update the MFEs, at least in my limited recent experience.

Author: I've written up a description in the OEP of what I think a shared dependency library would look like.  It's a bit of conjecture on what the exact implementation would be, but I think it's worth exploring as an important component of the OEP.  Happy to talk about it more, and there may be an easy solution I'm not thinking of.

One way or another, we're abandoning some of the independence of MFEs as originally envisioned years ago, in favor of more consistency between them, and we'll need a way to manage that.

Out of Scope
============

There are various aspects of this which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

- Opinions on which dependencies we should adopt going forward (such as redux or other state management solutions)
- Implementation details of how module federation would be added in the frontend-plugin-framework.
- Details of a monorepo approach.

> - How we will enforce dependency consistency.

Reviewer 2: It seems to me that this is a rather central point of this OEP. Being free of dependency consistency is one of the (few) essential benefits of an MFE architecture. The other being bounded domains, which would be lost by switching to a mono repo. 

But if there is any viable alternative to a mono repo, then I don't see it. Upgrading any dependency to a breaking release is going to trigger failures in CI at some point. The reference to the Node 20 upgrade process is not really adequate, because these applications are built in separate Docker containers or Docker layers.

Given the importance and the difficulty of this issue, I think it deserves a more thorough investigation.

Reviewer 4: I agree that this is an important issue to tackle, but I don't see it as a blocker for implementing module federation. We won't get all of the benefits of module federation without enforcing consistency, but for the most part (read: excluding singletons) we should be able to use the new architecture even if we have inconsistent dependencies.

Reviewer 2: Dependency consistency and maintenance are listed as two of the motivations for this OEP, so I think it's important that we get them right.

Author: FYI - I've decided for the sake of argument to include "maintaining dependency consistency" in the OEP, and added a section with a set of fairly specific recommendations.  Updated PR forthcoming, just getting it checked in.

Reviewer 5: But aren't enough of them already require `singleton`  anyway?  i.e.  https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-guest/blob/3c6e977de3206a63227c65fbaf586885e3b4f123/webpack.dev.config.js#L16-L31 

And I think for an extsive example/POC the list would include even more library that require `singleton`. 

Thus IMHO, _I think "dependency consistency" has to be a requirment or we start from there as phase 1_

Author: To my knowledge, React and frontend-platform are the only shared dependencies that need to be singletons.  (It's possible I updated that config to reflect this after your comment above, I cleaned it up at some point and can't remember!  I may have initially set a bunch of things as singletons in a prior version)

> - How Tutor and other distributions will need to change to adopt module federation.

Reviewer 2: Though not as critical as the above issue, I would most definitely appreciate some advance preparation for this item.

Author: I absolutely agree and have frantically trying to learn about Tutor so I can speak more intelligently about this. ;)  But for this OEP I think we do need to draw the line somewhere.

Reviewer 6: I think this would be an ADR to this OEP

The POC repositories can be found here:

- `frontend-app-mf-host <https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-host>`_
- `frontend-app-mf-guest <https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-guest>`_

To convert this into a reference implementation, we need to minimally:

- Create a new "shell" micro-frontend to be the top-level "host" for all our other micro-frontends.
- Create module federation-based development and production Webpack configurations in ``@edx/frontend-build``.
- Modify the Webpack configuration to share the complete list of shared dependencies from the shell.
- Pick an existing MFE (or two) to convert to use module federation. Add build targets to these "guest" micro-frontends that can be used to build them in module-federation mode.

> - Extend the Webpack configuration in the MFEs by defining what modules each "guest" MFE exposes.

Reviewer 3: If at all possible, I would prefer that the "list of modules exposed by each MFE" be done using the `package.json` `exports` field, which is the standard NodeJs way of doing this. And then it's not webpack-specific.

Author: Looking at the format of `exports` I think we could do this.  It _appears_ to be essentially the same as the `exposes` config in ModuleFederationPlugin, in which case we could just import package.json into the webpack config and read the `exports` field.

Author: Doc reference for those following along at home: https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#subpath-exports

Author: I've added this to the reference implementation description. 👍🏻

We need a mechanism to provide shared dependencies and composable frontends that can fit in with our existing ecosystem. Adopting Piral would likely involve significant refactoring of existing MFEs to fit into its framework and to turn them into "pilets", which locks us in to the Piral way of doing things.

It feels like our needs more closely align with the narrower scope of module federation, and that it's a more right-sized solution to our architectural problems.

Combining MFEs
==============

Folding our micro-frontends together into a few larger frontends (LMS and Studio, for instance) solves our need for shared dependencies in a different way - it just shares all the code so there's one set of dependencies for all of it. We could continue to rely on frontend-plugin-framework for cross-domain plugins, but "plugins" within the larger domain become a simple import from another part of the application.

> This approach was abandoned because we still believe that MFE independence is a core need for our platform, and we can't go back to a few monolithic frontends.

Reviewer 4: This also wouldn't get us runtime module replacement without iframes right?

Author: I don't think this approach does anything useful for that, yeah... you'd be stuck with using FPF, getting a slot added to the platform for the thing you want to replace, and then doing it with an iframe out to your custom MFE.

OEP-65: Frontend Composability
##############################

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - OEP
     - :doc:`OEP-65 <oep-0065-arch-frontend-composability>`
   * - Title
     - Frontend Composability
   * - Last Modified
     - 2024-04-12
   * - Authors
     - * Adolfo R. Brandes <adolfo@axim.org>
       * Pedro Martello <pedro@hammerlabs.net>
       * David Joy <david@joy.engineering>
   * - Arbiter
     - Adam Stankiewicz <astankiewicz@2u.com>
   * - Status

>      - Under Review

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
     - Provisional
```

   * - Type
     - Architecture
   * - Created
     - 2024-04-03
   * - Review Period

>      - April 15, 2024 - April 29, 2024

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
     - April 15, 2024 - May 10, 2024
```

Tooling
-------

Maintainers and developers should be warned of incompatibilities created by their PRs, or outside the repository by another project (such as the shell application).

This could take the form of Github tooling which notifies maintainers and developers that their frontend code has:

#. Drifted behind the compatible version of a shared dependency for a given Open edX release or the main branch.
#. Has upgraded beyond what is compatible with a given Open edX release or the main branch.

Code Organization
-----------------

We may want to refactor how we organize our code to help MFEs ensure they are utilizing dependency versions that align with what other MFEs are using. The goals of such a refactoring are to:

#. Reduce the number of individual dependency updates necessary in MFEs, which in turn reduces maintenance burden.
#. Provide MFEs with a set of shared dependencies guaranteed to be the same as the shell application.
#. Provide MFEs with a more predictable update cycle for shared dependencies, in-line with the Open edX Release cadence.

An ADR attached to this OEP will describe the final approach taken to solve this problem.

Out of Scope
============

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer 7: nit: typo 
```suggestion
There are a few important - but tangential - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.
```

* Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.
* Leveraging the `DEPR process <depr-process_>`_ for communication and removing old component versions.
* Aligning that removal and the subsequent breaking changes with Open edX releases, and documenting it in their release notes.

Further, we could reduce the overhead of dependency maintenance and ensure MFEs stay up to date by pinning dependencies to major versions using ``^`` in our package.json files.

Tooling
-------

Maintainers and developers should be warned of incompatibilities created by their PRs, or outside the repository by another project (such as the shell application).

This could take the form of Github tooling which notifies maintainers and developers that their frontend code has:

#. Drifted behind the compatible version of a shared dependency for a given Open edX release or the main branch.
#. Has upgraded beyond what is compatible with a given Open edX release or the main branch.

Code Organization

> -----------------

Author: Done!  Tweaked it a bit to fit in with the sections around it.

The system is confusing, somewhat brittle, and only works at build time. If a site operator needs different headers/footers/brands for different instances, we've just multiplied the number of builds they need to do (already a problem even without this - see the "Build time" issue above!)

Frontend Plugins (Current Option #3)
------------------------------------

With the creation of the `frontend-plugin-framework <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-plugin-framework>`_, we're starting to have the capability to share components across MFEs as plugins, either at build time (direct plugins) or runtime (iframe plugins)

Direct plugins create some flexibility, but couple our repositories' builds together. Iframes are good for sandboxing and isolating code, but they're a very inefficient way to compose a UI, especially given the consistency and user/developer experience concerns raised above. In a way, they exacerbate the problem even more. There's no way to do direct plugins via the MFE config API, since they rely on importing modules directly into the build.

Specification
*************

> Fundamentally, _runtime module loading_ and _shared dependencies_ address the majority of the problems described above (Consistency, User and Developer Experience, and Composability), so our approach centers on enabling these two capabilities.

Author: I oomphed it up!

> Fundamentally, _runtime module loading_ and _shared dependencies_ address the majority of the problems described above (Consistency, User and Developer Experience, and Composability), so our approach centers on enabling these two capabilities.

Author: I adjusted the Specification section and simplified it a bit.  I think it's in better shape now.

In the interim, MFEs will have both a webpack configuration that exposes modules for consumption by other hosts as alternate entry points (to use Webpack parlance) _and_ the primary entry point which initializes frontend platform and loads the header/footer. Early POC testing indicates this won't be a problem.

Reference Implementation
************************

A proof of concept has already been created demonstrating how Webpack module federation works with two Open edX micro-frontends based on the frontend-template-application. The POC has several shared libraries (``react``, ``react-dom``, and `paragon <paragon_>`_), and loads a React component module from a guest MFE into the page of a host MFE. It supports hot module replacement during development, and runs on the two MFEs' ``webpack-dev-server`` instances.

The POC repositories can be found here:

- `frontend-app-mf-host <https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-host>`_
- `frontend-app-mf-guest <https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-guest>`_

Proposed MFE Architecture
=========================

> .. image:: oep-0065/proposed-mfe-architecture.png

Reviewer 6: Note how we linked to Lucid within OEP-57: https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-proposals/en/latest/processes/oep-0057-proc-core-product.html#component-tiers

It would probably be EVEN BETTER to include a README within https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/tree/master/oeps/processes/oep-0057 that points to Lucid 🤔

> .. image:: oep-0065/proposed-mfe-architecture.png

Reviewer 6: like this! https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/pull/582

> .. image:: oep-0065/proposed-mfe-architecture.png

Author: Done!

     -

Total size: ~2,087.2k unzipped

Shared dependency advantages
----------------------------

- Encourages runtime consistency across all types of dependencies. If our MFEs use the same version, we significantly reduce the cognitive load and context switching involved in working with multiple MFEs, cut down on visual inconsistencies at runtime, etc.
- Reduces runtime bundle size. We'll ship far less code to the client across a user's browsing session.

Caveat: "build time" and "dependency maintenance"
-------------------------------------------------

Note that "build time" and "dependency maintenance" are not mentioned in the advantages above.  The reasons for this have to do with how shared dependencies are resolved for modules at runtime, and are described in more detail in the `Module federation`_ section below.

At a high level, even if MFEs share dependencies, we want to preserve the ability for them to "fall back" to their own version of a shared dependency if a version already loaded on the page is incompatible with their own.  To do this, each MFE builds and deploys its own version of all its dependencies in case dependency resolution determines they're needed.

> This means their build has to take time to bundle them, and the repository still needs the dependencies present in the package.json file.  Sharing dependencies doesn't help us much w/r/t build time and dependency maintenance.

Author: Sounds worth looking into as an optimization.

> This means their build has to take time to bundle them, and the repository still needs the dependencies present in the package.json file.  Sharing dependencies doesn't help us much w/r/t build time and dependency maintenance.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This means that the build of a given MFE has to take time to bundle their own dependencies, and the repository still needs the dependencies present in the package.json file.  Sharing dependencies doesn't help us much with respect to build time and dependency maintenance.
```
Mostly this is just making it easier to read, but at minimum please accept the unpacking of `w/r/t`

> This means their build has to take time to bundle them, and the repository still needs the dependencies present in the package.json file.  Sharing dependencies doesn't help us much w/r/t build time and dependency maintenance.

Reviewer 6: @xitij2000 it's definitely worth looking into build caches. I see that as an ADR on this OEP if we decide to go that route.

Module federation specifically addresses these use cases exactly. It's right-sized to the problem at hand, can be accomplished with a minimum of impact on our existing MFEs, and can be done in a backwards compatible way (more on that below).

An approach to maintaining dependency consistency is essential to realize the benefits of sharing dependencies, or we've accomplished very little even though we've added the capability. An approach to providing this consistency is not a prerequisite for implementing module federation, to be clear, but the `success` of module federation is tightly coupled to it.

Backward Compatibility
**********************

We intend to maintain backwards compatibility while migrating to using module federation. We can do this by creating a separate set of Webpack configurations in ``@edx/frontend-build`` and separate build targets in converted MFEs; the footprint of module federation on "guest" MFEs is very small, requiring virtually no code changes in the application itself, and a few additional configuration options in the MFE's Webpack config to identify exposed components.

> Ultimately MFEs will no longer be responsible for initializing frontend-platform or rendering the header and footer. We will follow the DEPR process for retiring this code in MFEs once (and if) we make the module federation architecture required.

Author: One of the goals is being able to get rid of some dependencies in the MFEs' repositories, like core-js, regenerator-runtime, the header/footer, and the brand package (I may be forgetting some).  Dropping these improves  dependency maintenance overhead and production build times.  Whatever we do, it'd be nice to arrive at a place where MFEs are "slimmer" than they are today.  

Looking into the future, I think it'd be great to have a single development server that runs the real shell, uses pre-built artifacts of any MFEs you're not working on, and runs a webpack-dev-server for the one under active development.  That's going to take some work to build/figure out, of course.  To get us started, it's very little development effort to run two dev servers, one for the shell, one for your MFE.  Or in the extreme sort term, just continue to use the MFE's initialization code as-is and ignore the shell.

Er, point being, it'd be nice to invest in making this a pleasant DX.

The POC repositories can be found here:

- `frontend-app-mf-host <https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-host>`_
- `frontend-app-mf-guest <https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-guest>`_

Proposed MFE Architecture
=========================

.. image:: oep-0065/proposed-mfe-architecture.png

MFEs and Modules
----------------

Each of our MFEs will export a set of one or more modules that can be loaded by other MFEs. For instance, ``frontend-app-profile`` would likely export the ``ProfilePage`` component. Other MFEs may export their own pages, or perhaps plugins/widgets/components to be loaded by the `frontend-plugin-framework <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-plugin-framework>`_ via a "module" plugin type based on this implementation.

Hosts and Guests
----------------

> MFEs become either "hosts" or "guests" or both. A host is an MFE that loads runtime modules from a guest. A guest may itself act as a host to modules from another guest.

Author: Yeah, I struggled a bit with the most concise way of defining all this.  I do expect that there will be plugins which will only act as "guests".  The shell is only a host.  All MFEs are guests in the shell.  Some pairs of MFEs may have a host/guest relationship with each other.  

> For one, I think if an MFE is exporting components for consumption as a runtime module, then that component should also be consumed as a runtime module in the same MFE.

One subtlety here: I think you're saying that if an MFE exposes a module, it should also "consume" its own module when loaded. I understand the point and agree in spirit - the issue is that in this architecture, there's nothing to 'consume' it, as MFEs are never loaded outside the context of the shell (or another MFE).  All MFEs are providing modules that are guests in either the shell or another MFE.  They have no other way of initializing, practically speaking, since the shell is the entry point for everything.

> MFEs become either "hosts" or "guests" or both. A host is an MFE that loads runtime modules from a guest. A guest may itself act as a host to modules from another guest.

Reviewer 6: > Yeah, I struggled a bit with the most concise way of defining all this. 

What if you added a third sentence that was like, "For example, the shell (relative link to next section) is only a host, and all MFEs are guests in the shell; further, some pairs of MFEs might have a host/guest relationship with each other.

Because your phrasing there really clarified it for me!

- Modify the Webpack configuration to share the complete list of shared dependencies from the shell.
- Pick an existing MFE (or two) to convert to use module federation. Add build targets to these "guest" micro-frontends that can be used to build them in module-federation mode.
- Extend the Webpack configuration in the MFEs by defining what modules each "guest" MFE exports.  We suggest that the package.json `exports <https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#subpath-exports>`_ field be used to codify this list of exports, and that Webpack pull it in from package.json to configure ``ModuleFederationPlugin``.  The format appears to be the same.
- Give "guest" MFEs a way of seeing their own config, since they'll be getting ``@edx/frontend-platform`` as a shared dependency from the shell, and won't be initializing it themselves.

Secondary concerns include:

- Ensuring nested dynamic modules work correctly.
- Ensuring static assets load properly in guest modules.
- DEPR process around the migration.
- Documentation on how to convert an MFE to use module federation and the shell.
- The default configuration for loading "core" MFEs.
- Documentation on how to do development

> - A decision on whether we use the MFE config API, env.config.js, both, or something else to supply the module federation configuration, whether it's one big combined document or whether each MFE has its own.

Reviewer: > Another option would be to make the MFE config itself an runtime module

This is the way I would like to see it done, thus deprecating `mfe_config` and removing the dependency on the `site_configuration` code for multitenancy.   Plus, it could be done entirely downstream: here's an issue in the tutor-mfe repository discussing it: https://github.com/overhangio/tutor-mfe/issues/199

- How we sandbox and put error boundaries around dynamically loaded modules.
- Whether we create a central global state store, and whether that's redux.

> - Whether we need an eventing system for inter-MFE communication.

Author: 👍🏻  Agreed!  A bad version of this is where we have a global redux store and all the MFEs write their own selectors for whatever they want; then we've created an API surface the same size as our data schema, which is unmaintainable.  

I'm still struggling to find good examples of where MFEs will actually need global state or inter-MFE communication.  If the learning MFE wants to display something related to discussions, it could load a discussions MFE module and let the logic be encapsulated within that.  Yes, we need basic layout coordination like the frontend-plugin-framework already has (and which I'd argue _is_ that framework), but the learning MFE domain shouldn't know about data/logic from the discussions domain, so to speak. 

I'd love to find some good concrete use cases here.  Global data store/eventing are pretty far down my personal feature list at the moment cause I can't find reasons we need them.

> - Whether we need an eventing system for inter-MFE communication.

Reviewer 3: My take:
- Encourage MFEs to use Tanstack Query for data loading instead of redux. Then there's no "global" state within nor among MFEs. But we need to support MFEs that currently use redux so that each has its own redux state and continues working without any changes. I don't think we should support a shared redux state across MFEs. (In the future we may use SSR or some other data loading technique, e.g. [Remix+TanStackQuery+SSR](https://tanstack.com/query/v4/docs/framework/react/guides/ssr#using-remix).)
- Don't support inter-MFE communication unless there's a really clear need.
   * If there is a need, consider using the [Broadcast Channel API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API) to achieve this, because it keeps state in sync not only among MFEs, but among all tabs the user has open. We use this in frontend-app-course-authoring to allow users to copy content in one tab, switch to another, and (see that they can) hit paste right away.

> - Whether we need an eventing system for inter-MFE communication.

Author: Thanks @bradenmacdonald - well put.  Outside of the OEP I'd had much the same thought about `react-query` (Tanstack Query).  If we used it more holistically, a lot of what we use redux for just evaporates. I can think of very little (the config and user object?) that's truly "global", and they don't use redux anyway. 

In the case of both global state and eventing, I really don't know of a clear need for either.

> - Whether we need an eventing system for inter-MFE communication.

Reviewer: +1 for `react-query`, as mentioned elsewhere in this PR.

+1 for not doing inter-MFE communication.  There might be use cases for communication between the host and guest, but even those are few and far between.

As a result, the architecture focused on creating an unopinionated, loosely coupled set of applications with the goal of enabling teams to iterate quickly and independently. This goal was successful.

However, now roughly 5 years into this gradual re-platforming, we've discovered that the completely siloed nature of these MFEs has created its own set of problems. These problems are described below.

Consistency
===========

Because each MFE is completely independent, this can create inconsistencies from MFE to MFE.

Reusable components (Paragon)
-----------------------------

MFEs may use different versions of ``@openedx/paragon``, resulting in functional and stylistic differences.

Header/Footer
-------------

MFEs may use different versions of ``@edx/frontend-component-header`` and ``@edx/frontend-component-footer``, also resulting in functional, stylistic, and content/navigation differences.

Branding
--------

> Brand packages created from ``@edx/brand-openedx`` may be different versions, resulting in any number of subtle visual differences.

Author: I don't feel too strongly... they felt different to me because application code can be affected by visual differences in brand versions even for places it's not using Paragon's reusable components. ¯\_(ツ)_/¯  FWIW the Reusable components one was more about functional and UI/layout differences (though I called it "stylistic" at the time, which is perhaps a poor choice of word...)

Other Dependencies
------------------

> MFEs may have completely different versions of any other dependency. We mitigate some of this by consolidating some important dependencies in ``@edx/frontend-build`` and ``@edx/frontend-platform``, but even those can have different versions from MFE to MFE. For developers, this increases cognitive load and slows velocity because of the need to adjust to the idiosyncracies of each application.

Author: Ugh, there are a bunch of these. I'm leaving the `@edx` ones that don't seem to have been updated.  Poor `@edx/frontend-platform`. 😢

Full Page Refreshes
-------------------

Each MFE has its own index.html page, and needs to load all its own dependencies from scratch whenever you navigate to it. This means that the browser performs a full page refresh each time a user transfers from MFE to MFE.

Build time
----------

Each MFE must bundle all its own dependencies at build time, creating significant overhead for the Webpack build process. When building multiple MFEs, this additional, repeated overhead adds up quickly, making builds prohibitively slow.

Dependency Maintenance
----------------------

Since each MFE has its own complete set of dependencies, the overhead of keeping them all up to date can be overwhelming. Security patches, bug fixes, new features, and breaking changes all add up and create a significant maintenance burden.

Composability
=============

We have no clean, low-overhead way of composing components from multiple MFEs into a single page, or extending an MFE with additional functionality.

> The reality of MFEs is that while each application may represent a cohesive domain or bounded context, sometimes you need content and functionality from more than one domain on the page at the same time.

Author: Language is hard. :joy:

If I'm remembering my DDD correctly, our MFEs are definitely bounded contexts in that they have their own domain model, complete with modest anti-corruption layers to massage our data into a schema that makes sense within that context. 

In spirit if not always perfectly in practice, our MFEs were _also_ intended to represent a domain or sub-domain of our overall application.  The learning MFE is about learning, course-authoring is about building courses, etc.  Whether those ended up the right granularity is definitely up for debate. 

So the spirit of this sentence is that, practically speaking, a domain or bounded context (an MFE) may need to display stuff from another domain (another MFE) to make a nice experience for users.  MFEs wanna load stuff from each other.  Totally open to a better way of saying this that doesn't feel like it opens up a can of interpretation worms. :joy:

> The reality of MFEs is that while each application may represent a cohesive domain or bounded context, sometimes you need content and functionality from more than one domain on the page at the same time.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The reality of MFEs is that while each application seeks to represent a single cohesive domain or bounded context, sometimes the reality is that content and functionality from more than one domain needs to be on the page at the same time.
```
Removes "you", which I dislike generally, and tries to capture that in _spirit_ we tried to represent one domain/context! I think it could be helpful, as in another comment, that if we seek to assume of the reader a definition of "cohesive domain" or "bounded context", it would be good to link to an authoritative definitional source so there's no confusion.

> The reality of MFEs is that while each application may represent a cohesive domain or bounded context, sometimes you need content and functionality from more than one domain on the page at the same time.

Author: I've tweaked the language here, and added some links out for 'domain' and 'bounded context'

Alternately, providers may want to show different *versions* of MFEs to different users while keeping the rest of the app (header, navigation, other MFEs) unchanged.

We aren't without options here, but what we have today has its own issues. It's worth walking through what we have today.

Shared Libraries (Current Option #1)
------------------------------------

Because each MFE is siloed from each other - both in repositories and at runtime - our only viable mechanism for sharing code has historically been to extract it into a shared library that gets bundled with each at build time. This creates more repository/dependency overhead.

Build-time package overrides (Current Option #2)
------------------------------------------------

NPM and package.json allow operators to override dependency resolution by installing an alternate version of a dependency prior to build time. This has historically been how we've allowed operators to override the header, footer, and brand.

> The system is confusing and somewhat brittle and only works at build time. If an operator needs different headers/footers/brands for different clients, we've just multiplied the number of builds they need to do (already a problem even without this - see the "Build time" issue above!)

Author: This is what happens when you go back and add more descriptive terms and forget your Oxford comma.

... 😏

Runtime module loading advantages
---------------------------------

- Reduces the frequency of full page refreshes. MFEs today are completely independent, so navigating between them means loading a completely new page (even if they share dependencies).
- Improves composability across MFEs/domains. We have no way to show more than one MFE on the same page today except by using iframes or by creating hard dependencies between MFEs at build-time by extracting 'shared' code into a new library, like `frontend-component-header <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-component-header>`_, `frontend-component-footer <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-component-footer>`_, or `frontend-lib-content-components <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-lib-content-components>`_, which increases our dependency maintenance burden significantly.
- Improves runtime extensiblity by allowing us to configure where an MFE's code should be loaded from, rather than needing to build it in to an app. It dovetails nicely with the FPF by providing us with a seamless, performant, and flexible way of extending our frontends without needing to rebuild the host.

Shared Dependencies
===================

> 

Reviewer 5: We can utilize `Shared Dependencies` without necessary using module federation right?.

Author: There are other ways to do it, yes.  But MF also provides logic to deal with incompatibilities between versions that are already loaded and those needed by dynamically loaded modules, which is pretty nice.

Author: @sarina, are you saying you'd like to see something here about module federation's logic for dealing with incompatibilities, or about how we can have shared deps without using MF?  

In either case, at this point in the OEP was trying not to get into the implementation (module federation) too much, reserving that for the 'refererence implementation' section.

Reviewer 6: No action needed here. I was bookmarking the comment but I think I got enough of the gist of how incompatibilites work later on.

Sharing dependencies between MFEs at runtime compliments runtime module loading.

As noted above, MFEs have a number of dependencies which are common between them, but which aren't actually shared at runtime in any way. The capability to share these dependencies - such as ``react``, ``@openedx/paragon``, etc. - would mitigate a great deal of our `Consistency`_ and `User and Developer Experience`_ issues.

We expect the following packages - which are used in the vast majority of MFEs today - could all be shared between MFEs.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 20 50

   * - **Package**
     - **Estimated Size**
     - **Notes**
   * - @edx/brand
     - Variable
     -
   * - @edx/frontend-component-footer
     - 88.1k
     -
   * - @edx/frontend-component-header
     - 156.9k
     -
   * - @edx/frontend-platform
     - 355.3k
     -
   * - @openedx/paragon (or @edx/paragon)

>      - ~950k

Reviewer 5: _Please take my comment with grain of salt_: I think to my knowledge tree shaking and module federation don't generally go smooth with each other.  see this https://github.com/webpack/webpack/discussions/12532 . 
If I understand the concept correctly; Tree shaking happens at build time but a _guest app could be loaded/known at runtime_, so how can webpack at build knows/expect which componenet keep/remove from the bundle.

>      - ~950k

Reviewer 7: @ghassanmas What you described is my understanding as well. _If_ we're OK with this tradeoff, probably makes sense to make sure its considered/mentioned in the OEP, as it directly relates to the underlying motivation of trying to mitigate performance concerns related to dependencies.

>      - ~950k

Reviewer 3: FWIW when testing out a hacky MFE shell with Vite, I discovered happily that it's really easy to [visualize the bundle size](https://github.com/open-craft/frontend-app-shell?tab=readme-ov-file#visualizing-bundle-result), though it shows much smaller sizes for the packages than what is written here in the OEP - e.g. for `frontend-component-header` it's 45KB and `footer` is only 18KB (both uncompressed). Paragon is (140KB + 125 KB = 265 KB). It seems pretty clear that the difference is due to aggressive tree-shaking.

![](https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/assets/945577/8e4ef7f6-8300-49b5-a416-88c1239f0485)

What you can see as I put in [the README](https://github.com/open-craft/frontend-app-shell?tab=readme-ov-file#visualizing-bundle-result) is:

> _Two_ versions of Paragon are present, but it's because each part (shell, profile) only loads the parts that it actually needs (tree-shaking). There seems to be no overlap between them. TODO: investigate how to tell Vite to include _all_ of Paragon in the shell bundle proactively.

I think it should be pretty easy to check this for the webpack version using the analogous [webpack bundle analyzer](https://www.npmjs.com/package/webpack-bundle-analyzer).

> Tree shaking happens at build time but a guest app could be loaded/known at runtime, so how can webpack at build knows/expect which componenet keep/remove from the bundle.

Not necessarily. In this case, tree-shaking happens at build time, and the MFEs get built together with the shell. Code splitting is used so that the MFE can be loaded dynamically at runtime, but what loads is an optimized bundle of the MFE that is already tree-shaken. You can't just load a random new MFE at runtime though - this assumes that there is a build step where the shell and all the constituent MFEs get built. It may be quite possible to build the MFEs separately though, as long as the build process is aware of what's in the shared bundle and what needs to be bundled for the MFE.

>      - ~950k

Reviewer 6: > loading a random new MFE at runtime is an explicit goal

Nice, I love it. Searching around the text I think that is implied but it'd be good to clearly state it up front. All our "explict goals" should be clear, likely in the Motivation section.

Module Federation
-----------------

Module federation is implemented as a `plugin for Webpack <https://webpack.js.org/plugins/module-federation-plugin/>`_ that enables micro-frontends to be composed into the same page at runtime even if they're built separately and independently deployed. The pieces being composed are "modules". It lets us configure which dependencies should be shared between modules on a page and what modules a particular frontend exposes to be loaded by other frontends.

If two modules require incompatible versions of a shared dependency, the second one loaded can fall back to loading a version it's compatible with from its own build. (see the link in step #4 below for details.)

In terms of Open edX MFEs, this means:

1. MFEs can continue to be built independently.

> 2. The Webpack build will include a manifest of which sub-modules the MFE provides at runtime.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I have that concern. If I have time, I'd love to try a proof of concept of this approach but using Vite instead of webpack.

> 2. The Webpack build will include a manifest of which sub-modules the MFE provides at runtime.

Reviewer 3: Got it working :) POC https://github.com/open-craft/frontend-app-shell

> 2. The Webpack build will include a manifest of which sub-modules the MFE provides at runtime.

Reviewer 4: Just a note that moving to vite from webpack would require an ADR updating https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-proposals/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0067-bp-tools-and-technology.html

> 2. The Webpack build will include a manifest of which sub-modules the MFE provides at runtime.

Reviewer 6: Would moving to Vite require a rethink of this section, or this OEP?

> 2. The Webpack build will include a manifest of which sub-modules the MFE provides at runtime.

Reviewer 3: > We're looking into your PoC, @bradenmacdonald, thanks for that!

@arbrandes Let me know if you want me to try to turn on "[actual module federation](https://github.com/open-craft/frontend-app-shell?tab=readme-ov-file#what-this-does-not-demonstrate)" in that POC. I think there's a good case that the end result is better without it, but if y'all consider it a hard requirement then I'm happy to update the POC to show how it works with that configured.

This proposal fundamentally changes how we work with MFE dependencies, and will require us to adopt a more rigorous approach to ensuring dependency consistency and compatiblity. That consistency doesn't come for free just by adopting shared dependencies at runtime: independent codebases will need to be kept in sync.

We expect that this may need to take a number of possible forms.

Process
^^^^^^^

We need to ensure maintainers and developers know what dependency versions to use, and when they need to upgrade to stay consistent. Open edX release documentation should include documentation of which frontend dependency versions are compatible with the release, likely pinned to a major version (i.e., React 17.x, Paragon 22.x, etc.)

We also need a process to migrate core repositories through breaking changes in third-party dependencies. Ideally follow the `Upgrade Project Runbook <https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AC/pages/3660316693/Upgrade+Project+Runbook>`_.

Best Practices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We need to ensure we minimize breaking changes in our own libraries (such as Paragon, the header, footer, frontend-platform, frontend-build, etc.) We suggest accomplishing this by:

> - Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.

Author: Honestly, I'd defer to you on details of the right arrangement here/something that isn't at odds with Paragon's organization philosophy.  From what you said, though, I expect the need to almost completely avoid breaking changes may be fundamentally at odds with the current naming scheme.  

The end goal is to avoid breaking changes, which means that MFEs that haven't been upgraded need to have a consistent set of exports/imports that don't change out from underneath them.  So replacing the implementation of `Button` with a new one is a breaking change, but creating a new component called `ButtonV2` that maintainers can switch over to at their leisure isn't.  

Just thinking out loud, and while acknowledging to the overhead involved - if we need to deprecate old versions of components (which should be pretty infrequent, I'd hope!?), we should follow the DEPR process and align those deprecations to Open edX releases. 🤔

> - Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.

Reviewer 6: > we should follow the DEPR process and align those deprecations to Open edX releases. 🤔

💟

> - Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.

Author: One clarification:

> But I'm not sure it should align with Open edX releases, because that would imply that it's ok to make a breaking change as long as the next release is far enough away.

I actually meant the opposite.  And to be clear, I don't have a lot of experience running our release processes, so this may be untenable for all I know.  But I was thinking a new release is an opportunity to make breaking changes since folks are expecting a upgrade process anyway.  Like, as part of cutting and finalizing a release, we resolve things like "ButtonV2" back to "Button" and remove the old version/move it to Deprecated, whatever.  That's what I meant by "aligning" the DEPR processes to releases, which I thought generally happened anyway.

> - Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.

Reviewer 6: Yeah, that's how I was interpreting it. Like this timeline, with a potential addition of a third release if a slower timeline is required:

* Sumac introduces ButtonV2 as the new hotness, and default components migrated over. Noted that Button will be deprecated in Teak, but is available for now.
* Teak: ButtonV2 no longer available

Is that what you were thinking?

> - Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.

Author: More or less.  I'm not sure how granular these steps need to be, but something like the following.  Note that this sounds involved, but it's important to remember we should do this _very infrequently_ as a last resort.  And also it sounds like a lot of work for a button, but that's just our example.  This is presumably much more likely in a complex, more involved Paragon component, possibly with subcomponents.  

- `ButtonV2` is created in the main branch whenever it became necessary to make a breaking change.
- Any new code that needs `ButtonV2` uses it with that name in the main branch.
- A DEPR process is initiated for `Button` (v1), stating that it will be deprecated in Sumac, please don't use it for new work, and go upgrade your code to `ButtonV2`.  
- Sumac comes along, code still says `ButtonV2` and some warnings are printed in peoples' consoles about `Button` stating to go upgrade to `ButtonV2` because the old implementation will be removed in Teak.
- In Teak, `Button` either gets deleted or moved to `ButtonDeprecated` (or something) if people need more time. 
 `ButtonV2` is renamed to `Button`.  Tooling could easily automate making this naming change for consumers (and I think Paragon already has this sort of thing)
 
So the only breaking change is in Teak, and involves 1) getting off of the old Button if you haven't in Sumac, and 2) renaming your button.

If the new code goes in as `Button`, everyone on main has to immediately respond to the change (which may be nearly impossible if we're talking about shared dependencies via the shell), and anyone on Open edX Releases will have a breaking change in the very next release with no warning.

> - Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.

Reviewer 6: Got it and we are in agreement! Thanks for filling in the specific Paragon/Frontend details.

> - Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.

Author: @adamstankiewicz, very curious if you think the above sounds viable or completely insane.

Tooling
^^^^^^^

Maintainers and developers should be warned of incompatibilities created by their PRs, or outside the repository by another project (such as the shell).

This could take the form of Github tooling which notifies maintainers and developers that their frontend code has:

1. Drifted behind the compatible version of a shared dependency for a given Open edX release or the main branch.
2. Has upgraded beyond what is compatible with a given Open edX release or the main branch.

Code Organization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We propose creating a passthrough library of shared dependencies. MFEs would depend on this single library in its package.json rather than on individual shared dependencies. This library would be versioned in accordance with the `Best Practices`_ suggestions above, meaning that breaking changes would be minimized and dependencies would be pinned to major versions via ``^`` on version numbers. Its version manifest would be the source of the version numbers for the `Process`_ and `Tooling`_ suggestions.

> 

Reviewer 5: Can you elobrate more on `passthrough library`  if possibe, I understood as:  _we are going to create monorepo that has header/footer/paragon...etc_. But I suspect that I am incorrect.

Author: We're not planning on creating a monorepo, this is a different idea to bundle our shared dependencies into a single library.  A monorepo is where the source code of multiple packages exists in the same repository. 

The idea of the 'passthrough' is that we'd have a library called something like `frontend-lib-shared-deps`.  It would basically do something like this:

```
export React from 'react';
export ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
export * as Paragon from '@openedx/paragon';
// etc.  The above may not be quite right, syntactically.
```

It'd basically take a bundle of dependencies and re-export them.  There's a lot of details glossed over in this - how do MFEs then import those modules?  Would we start doing `import { ReactDOM } from '@openedx/frontend-lib-shared-deps';` and stuff like that?  Do we introduce some webpack aliases so that we can continue to do `import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';`?  How does the versioning of this library work?  Do we use semantic versioning with it, and manually create releases that bundle a group of updates from dependencies so that we have to update less often?  How do we handle breaking changes in shared libraries?  I don't quite have answers to all that.  But the idea is to reduce the surface area of our dependencies to make it easier to stay up to date.  

I don't have a strong opinion on whether this OEP should have more _or less_ detail on these ideas.

Reviewer 8: Maintaining this passthrough library sounds very complicated. Is the goal of reducing the number of breaking changes something we could solve with github tooling? We are already facing a similar issue with the maintenance of all the python libraries and we could reuse the same github tooling for both

Reviewer 8: I found previous comments explaining more the need of the passthrough and even though I still find it complicated, I no longer think simple github tooling could solve it.

Author: Agreed about the tooling, unfortunately.  I'm adding some language here that explains why we might want to do this.

To minimize impact on our MFEs, this library may need to be supported with some build-time configuration in Webpack that aliases its passthrough imports to their original package names. This would let us continue to write:

>   ``import React from 'react';``

Author: Oh, yes, exemplary - poor choice of an example.  Maybe I should use ReactDOM instead.

Instead of having to write something like:

  ``import React from '@openedx/<passthrough library name>/react';``

or:

  ``import { React } from '@openedx/<passthrough library name>';``

Out of Scope
============

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer 3: SSR sounds like a nice optimization but from personal experience I actually prefer SPAs - the architecture is much simpler. SSR usually requires an actual web application to serve your frontend, as opposed to just dumping static files onto a CDN. And more annoyingly, "React Server Components" and "React Components" are very similar and often inter-mixed, but they behave differently and have different APIs available for sharing context, loading data, etc., and this makes the whole codebase much more complex - little gotchas everywhere.

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer 5: I think if we had had Node.JS as server instead of Django this path might easier, though there is a library https://github.com/markfinger/python-react that lets you render react on python based app/server, I doubt that is production ready anyway. 

I don't want to divert from the orignal topic, but still I feel very tempted to say, in the long run I think it's worth considering... Imagine a world where the unit/xblocks instead of being  _rendered through django-template/theme in learning MFE as iframe_ to be rendered simliar to other MFE, and one way that might happen if we support SSR in our current/future MFE 's ecosystem.  

Note: _I personally have strong opinion about the UX/UI of the learning MFE, because I believe it's the most important part of the product; a nice looking react compoenent would motivate learner to keep learning though a self-motivated learner would stick in any case :)_

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer 7: > SSR sounds like a nice optimization but from personal experience I actually prefer SPAs - the architecture is much simpler. SSR usually requires an actual web application to serve your frontend, as opposed to just dumping static files onto a CDN.

I agree SPAs are simpler architecturally, but I feel we shouldn't purely be optimizing for ease-of-development either; the rationale for SSR is more focused on users, and specifically the UX and performance (it's a _significant_ performance bottleneck for users to download JS/CSS assets at runtime today). As alluded to above, there's a reason React [officially recommends](https://react.dev/learn/start-a-new-react-project#can-i-use-react-without-a-framework) using a framework as a best practice at this point, and deprecated its `create-react-app` CLI to bootstrap new SPAs in favor of SSR frameworks.

> SSR usually requires an actual web application to serve your frontend.

Yes, it would introduce some infrastructure complexity on how to properly host SSR-compatible MFEs. IMHO, this seems like a fair tradeoff, though, to ensure Open edX MFEs are actually performant for users, especially on slower network speeds, where they are not today (e.g., there are **no** 2U/edX.org hosted MFEs with a Largest Contentful Paint in the "Good" threshold, largely due to the lengthy initial page load, and how most MFEs only start fetching data _after_ components have rendered, resulting in request waterfalls that are otherwise difficult to wrangle).

Code splitting and shared dependencies across MFEs can only get you so much in terms of frontend performance for standard/vanilla SPAs. For example, anecdotally, we just wrapped up a decently sized re-architecture of the `frontend-app-learner-portal-enterprise` MFE to migrate all its routes (~15-20 page routes) and API calls to React Router's route [loaders](https://reactrouter.com/en/main/route/loader) and React Query (for caching / automatic query retries); at this point we've largely exhausted most readily available code splitting options and other vanilla SPA "best practices" around performance (e.g., "Fetch-_Then_-Render" with route loaders, preconnect origins, etc.) yet had _little to no_ meaningful change in initial page load or Core Web Vitals (e.g., Largest Contentful Paint), despite the "Route change" duration decreasing significantly from ~15s to 5s (95th percentile); I feel this poor initial page load for users and seemingly inability to address it can be directly attributed to the lack of SSR support.

> I think if we had had Node.JS as server instead of Django this path might easier, though there is a library https://github.com/markfinger/python-react that lets you render react on python based app/server, I doubt that is production ready anyway.

When mentioning SSR as it relates to React, the assumption is generally that it'd be a Node.js server used. The SSR frameworks referred to here (e.g., Next.js, Remix, etc.) are specifically designed to work with React and all its nuances; Python-based services rendering standard React components are not.

FWIW, I believe `python-react` is fairly similar to the existing approach available in Django (at least in edx-platform) today to render React components ([source](https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/9d29595602e62c41d9b35731a8686d1c1d5e3609/common/djangoapps/pipeline_mako/templates/static_content.html#L158-L183)). Personally, I wouldn't necessarily consider a Python-based approach to be synonymous with modern SSR for React applications (e.g., using Remix).

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer 5: >  FWIW, I believe python-react is fairly similar to the existing approach available in Django (at least in edx-platform) today to render React components ([source](https://github.com/openedx/edx-platform/blob/9d29595602e62c41d9b35731a8686d1c1d5e3609/common/djangoapps/pipeline_mako/templates/static_content.html#L158-L183)). Personally, I wouldn't necessarily consider a Python-based approach to be synonymous with modern SSR for React applications (e.g., using Remix). 

I didn't know about edx-platform rendering of react, it seems it relies on this django https://github.com/django-webpack/django-webpack-loader app... 
I need to dig into it to know how it works, or/and compare to Remix... nonetheless I am not implying that the current defacto python based react render  (be it `django-webpack-loader` or `python-react`)is compatible with modern React SSR, rather to show it might be possible or as a building block. 

my conclusion if we are on the same page;  to be able to support the modern SSR either 1) develop python based service/app that support modern SSR or 2) we need to depend on Node.js type of service next, remix or alike. 

Lastly what I envision is, the SSR part react would be complitable with MFE, such that it utilize  [hydrateRoot](https://react.dev/reference/react-dom/client/hydrateRoot)

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer 3: @adamstankiewicz You make good points. Though if we're going to fix that by adopting SSR, then I think we might as well adopt either Next.js or Remix to take advantage of everything that a framework provides. At least with a framework there are conventions, tools, documentation, and fellow travellers to make dealing with the complexities of SSR much more manageable.

(I still am of the opinion that the way that server components and client components get smudged together creates an annoying DX, but I realize there are trade-offs here...)

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer 6: > Yes, it would introduce some infrastructure complexity on how to properly host SSR-compatible MFEs. IMHO, this seems like a fair tradeoff, though, to ensure Open edX MFEs are actually performant for users, especially on slower network speeds, 

One thing I do want to gently point out is that not all operators are OpenCraft or 2U or eduNEXT. I don't actually know the answer to this question: to what extent do we, as the project, want to encourage the ability for a small operator, perhaps a single person, to be able to stand up an instance without a great depth of DevOps knowledge? What does a better job of increasing access to knowledge, the very optimal user experience or a less optimal one that their rural high school admin can set up? This is a conversation I have idly had with Jenna, with no answer.

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer: To answer Adam's original question: no, SSR is not being considered here.  And neither is a framework.  The whole point of picking vanilla Webpack Module Federation over Piral was so we wouldn't have to refactor too much.  It sounds to me like Next.js would be much worse in that respect.

Are we prioritizing developers and operators over the users, then?  No.  It's just that moving from SPA to SSR is a significantly bigger lift than adopting Webpack Module federation plus some tooling and conventions around dependencies, all of which bring their own benefits.  Not only that, Module Federation is not the only thing that might preclude the adoption of a frontend framework - as we've been saying, it's a whole other ballpark.  As such, we should consider it separately.

(And since this has been brought up in this thread, for what it's worth I think we should totally be doing some refactoring around route loaders and React query - even if for nothing else than how much more sane it makes the architecture.  But, again, that should be a separate OEP/ADR.)

> There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

Reviewer 4: > consider whether Server-Side Rendering (SSR) is compatible with composable MFEs with module federation to not preclude that from being an option in the future.

SSR with MF examples exist here https://github.com/module-federation/module-federation-examples/tree/master/server-side-rendering so I don't think this work will *prevent* any future SSR work.

The POC repositories can be found here:

- `frontend-app-mf-host <https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-host>`_
- `frontend-app-mf-guest <https://github.com/davidjoy/frontend-app-mf-guest>`_

Proposed MFE Architecture
=========================

.. image:: oep-0065/proposed-mfe-architecture.png

MFEs and Modules
----------------

Each of our MFEs will export a set of one or more modules that can be loaded by other MFEs. For instance, ``frontend-app-profile`` would likely export the ``ProfilePage`` component. Other MFEs may export their own pages, or perhaps plugins/widgets/components to be loaded by the `frontend-plugin-framework <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-plugin-framework>`_ via a "module" plugin type based on this implementation.

Hosts and Guests
----------------

MFEs become either "hosts" or "guests" or both. A host is an MFE that loads runtime modules from a guest. A guest may itself act as a host to modules from another guest.

Shell MFE
---------

> We will create a new "shell" MFE to act as the top-level host for all other MFEs. It is exclusively responsible for:

Author: This is envisioned as one shell for everything across all domains.

> We will create a new "shell" MFE to act as the top-level host for all other MFEs. It is exclusively responsible for:

Reviewer 3: What about the Course Authoring MFE? Though the "library" functionality is currently separate, it's planned to be merged in, so all of "Studio" is essentially just a single MFE (frontend-app-course-authoring). I don't think it needs a shell or composability, unless there is a future plan to break it up.

Plus, it has a different header and often doesn't need to be themed.

> We will create a new "shell" MFE to act as the top-level host for all other MFEs. It is exclusively responsible for:

Author: As an aside, I believe the studio header is already in frontend-component-header, for what it's worth. 😄 

Looking through the motivation section, I think nearly all of the benefits of a unified shell still apply if course-authoring shares a shell with everything else and get worse if it doesn't.  Course teams, instructors, course authors, developers, and operators still see all the same improvements as they would for any other MFE.  It's just learners that don't really care about where course-authoring lives since they don't visit it.  

I agree that this is generally less _important_ for course-authoring for the reasons you said, but I can't think of an upside to separating it out, rather than just keeping things simpler and folding it in with all the others. 🤔

> We will create a new "shell" MFE to act as the top-level host for all other MFEs. It is exclusively responsible for:

Reviewer 3: > As an aside, I believe the studio header is already in frontend-component-header, for what it's worth. 😄

Yes, and it's currently getting bundled into every MFE, even the learner-only ones :p

> We will create a new "shell" MFE to act as the top-level host for all other MFEs. It is exclusively responsible for:

Author: Worth thinking about how we want headers to work going forward.  Thinking out loud - the shell could own the headers in the core product and expose them as modules so that they only get downloaded on demand.  That way if (for instance) the studio header is in there, users don't pay the price for it unless they actually visit studio.

> We will create a new "shell" MFE to act as the top-level host for all other MFEs. It is exclusively responsible for:

Author: Also, I would have expected the studio header to get tree-shaken out if it wasn't used by the MFE!  if it's not that seems broken.  But I digress.

> We will create a new "shell" MFE to act as the top-level host for all other MFEs. It is exclusively responsible for:

Reviewer 3: > Also, I would have expected the studio header to get tree-shaken out if it wasn't used by the MFE!

I [explained that in the updated README](https://github.com/open-craft/frontend-app-shell?tab=readme-ov-file#visualizing-bundle-result):

> I believe this is because [Studio header] uses `ensureConfig()` at import time, so it cannot be tree-shaken out.

================================================

To convert this POC into a reference implementation, we need to minimally:

- Create a new "shell" micro-frontend to be the top-level "host" for all our other micro-frontends.
- Create module federation-based development and production Webpack configurations in ``@edx/frontend-build``.
- Modify the Webpack configuration to share the complete list of shared dependencies from the shell.
- Pick an existing MFE (or two) to convert to use module federation. Add build targets to these "guest" micro-frontends that can be used to build them in module-federation mode.
- Extend the Webpack configuration in the MFEs by defining what modules each "guest" MFE exports.  We suggest that the package.json `exports <https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#subpath-exports>`_ field be used to codify this list of exports, and that Webpack pull it in from package.json to configure ``ModuleFederationPlugin``.  The format appears to be the same.
- Give "guest" MFEs a way of seeing their own config, since they'll be getting ``@edx/frontend-platform`` as a shared dependency from the shell, and won't be initializing it themselves.

> Secondary concerns include:

Author: I was envisioning us adding a `ModuleRoute` (or a better name if we have one) to frontend-platform that pairs a route path with a particular module to load when it becomes active.  I think we could encapsulate the module loading/lazy/Suspense code so that folks don't have to think about it and can just think it routes.  The 'shell' will need to use a bunch of these `ModuleRoute`s for the "core" modules it expects to load, plus any other routes that we configure for custom MFEs.

One thing I need to go sanity check in a POC is how react-router works with module federation and if there are somehow issues there.  Deep linking may get interesting, for instance. 😬 And I'm not sure I understand how we get code splitting "out of the box" with single-spa or Piral, or how they'd be any different... you still need to dictate where your dynamic module boundaries are, presumably.  Do you mean that they have code that translates a route into a module?  (if so, yeah, we don't get that OOTB)

> Secondary concerns include:

Author: And now I need to go read up on `loadable-components` cause I've never heard of it...

> Secondary concerns include:

Reviewer 7: > One thing I need to go sanity check in a POC is how react-router works with module federation and if there are somehow issues there.

In my early POC's with module federation from awhile ago, I recall routing being a concern; specifically with the sharing of a single instance of `history`. For example, if a child MFE ends up with a different `history` object than the parent/host MFE, any routing triggered from the child MFE may not work properly.

Hopefully the singleton approach with frontend-platform will mitigate that, though.

- Ensuring nested dynamic modules work correctly.
- Ensuring static assets load properly in guest modules.
- DEPR process around the migration.
- Documentation on how to convert an MFE to use module federation and the shell.
- The default configuration for loading "core" MFEs.

> - Documentation on how to do development

Author: There's the basic dev setup we get 'for free', and then there's stuff we can do to make it a better DX, I think.

In the basic setup, as in MFEs today, you need to run a dev server for whatever you want to see, or find a way to point parts of it at staging.  Now we've added a shell into the mix that needs to run too, which technically makes that a little worse.  (This is what we get for wanting nice things!). Put another way, module federation doesn't really improve our dev environment on its own. 

I mentioned this idea somewhere else on this PR, but I'm wondering if we can't get to a place where development runs on pre-built artifacts for any MFE that isn't under active development.  Seems like that shouldn't be that hard to set up - run `npm run build` on a bunch of MFEs, dump the output into subdirectories in the shell and serve it.  And/or if you're using stock versions of the MFEs, maybe download an official release of the MFE from npm/Github (remember the profile MFE's brief life as an npm package?). 

I think we end up with a webpack-dev-server for code you're developing, and maybe an express server to serve everything you're not developing (i.e., the shell and other MFEs)... Unless we find a way for the shell to act as the webpack-dev-server for the MFE you're developing or something fancy like that, but it's not obvious to me how that'd be done, and it may be complicated/confusing for folks.

> - Documentation on how to do development

Reviewer 9: I think tutor can help here. It can detect if you have mounted an MFE directory, and in that case use the devserver while using the pre-built MFE assets in the other case. 

This doesn't account for cases where one might want to mount an MFE directory but still use the pre-built assets, but in any case most people will only work on one or two MFEs at a time, and it's easy to add and remove mounts.

> - Documentation on how to do development

Reviewer: > development runs on pre-built artifacts for any MFE that isn't under active development

Tutor could give us this.  It already does for any MFE you're not actively developing.

What it doesn't do currently - at least not in a documented way (I hear @bradenmacdonald found a workaround with Vite) - is let you run `npm start` outside Docker, and then use _that_ to develop while other MFEs are hosted as built artifacts.  This would also be ideal to have.

> - Documentation on how to do development

Reviewer 3: > What it doesn't do currently - at least not in a documented way (I hear @bradenmacdonald found a workaround with Vite) - is let you run npm start outside Docker, and then use that to develop while other MFEs are hosted as built artifacts.

I found a workaround for Vite, yes, but also for webpack too - it doesn't require any changes to the MFE codebase. Since I found it, I no longer run dev mode MFEs with tutor. I just run them on the host since it's way faster and simpler.

e.g. to run course authoring on the host you use this command today, with no changes to anything else:

```
APP_ID=course-authoring PUBLIC_PATH=/course-authoring/ MFE_CONFIG_API_URL='http://localhost:8000/api/mfe_config/v1' npm run start -- --host apps.local.overhang.io
```

> - Documentation on how to do development

Author: Just noting that I don't think there's anything actionable in this comment thread for this OEP, so I'm not planning on updating it based on what we've said here. :)

- A decision on whether we use the MFE config API, env.config.js, both, or something else to supply the module federation configuration, whether it's one big combined document or whether each MFE has its own.

> - How we sandbox and put error boundaries around dynamically loaded modules.

Author: I'd expect any built-in error handling around it to be fairly rudimentary, and wouldn't result in finding the most recent version of that chunk.  Seems like some companion documentation about best practices when deploying MFEs.  Using module federation will likely exacerbate the problem, but it's also already something we're dealing with.

OEP-65: Frontend Composability
##############################

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - OEP

>      - :doc:`OEP-65 <oep-0065-arch-frontend-composability>`

Reviewer 6: Note: This is the preferred way of titling the doc (`oep-####-(type)-(name)`) but the actual title of this file doesn't have the `arch` in it

Author: I wonder if we lose all the comments if I rename the doc... 😬

Reviewer 6: Yeah, that is actually possible. Maybe get it perfect on this PR, close the PR, and open a new one with the properly titled document - no discussion, just straight to merge?

Author: Yeah, fixing it in a follow-up step sounds like a safer option.

   * - Title
     - Frontend Composability
   * - Last Modified
     - 2024-04-12
   * - Authors
     -
       * Adolfo R. Brandes <adolfo@axim.org>
       * Pedro Martello <pedro@hammerlabs.net>
       * David Joy <david@joy.engineering>
   * - Arbiter
     - Adam Stankiewicz <astankiewicz@2u.com>
   * - Status
     - Under Review
   * - Type
     - Architecture
   * - Created
     - 2024-04-03
   * - Review Period
     - April 15, 2024 - April 29, 2024
   * - Resolution
     - <links to any discussions where the final status was decided>
   * - References
     -
       * `FC-0054 - Composable Micro-frontends Discovery <https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/COMM/pages/4063821827/FC-0054+-+Composable+Micro-frontends+Piral+Discovery>`_
       * `FC-0007 - Modular MFE Domains Discovery <https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/COMM/pages/3614900241/CLOSED+FC-0007+-+Modular+MFE+Domains+Discovery>`_

Abstract
********

> This OEP proposes that Open edX micro-frontends (MFEs) adopt module federation as an approach to address inconsistencies, performance issues, and inflexibilities inherent in the current MFE architecture.

Reviewer 6: Nit: When reading this in the future, the word "current" will be confusing. Perhaps, "inherent in the MFE architecture first proposed in `link to oep`" or "inherent in the MFE architecture that was first developed in $year"? Or "inherent in the prior MFE architecture (described below)"?

Author: I... wish there was an OEP that detailed the rationale for switching to MFEs. 🤦🏻

Motivation
**********

> Micro-frontends were originally designed to avoid some of the limitations of the monolithic ``edx-platform`` frontend, namely that otherwise independent teams were beholden to the build, test, and release lifecycle of the rest of the codebase. This dramatically slowed down the pace of frontend feature development, experimentation, and innovation.

Reviewer 6: Cautious nit: Is it worth clarifying that this was done explicitly for the benefits of those deploying off of master? AFAIK there's no particular benefit if you're strictly running off a named release, beyond more operational headache. There may be some benefit if you modify a given named release's code?

Reviewer 4: I can see benefits to not having a monolith even when running a named release. For example: if someone were to fork off `quince.1` and modify a single MFE, they could still pull in `quince.2` and `quince.3` for the MFEs that they did not modify.

Reviewer 8: I would say the strongest benefit is felt by instances so large that actually have multiple independent teams. The most well known large instance just so happens to have both situations in parallel.
Still I think it is work clarifying that.

Author: I'm adding some detail that it was: 1) for independent teams in edX's large engineering org, and 2) that it primarily benefits the master branch where the rate of change is particularly high.

Reviewer 6: OK, thanks. I agree... decision docs of _why_ we went with MFEs would be nice...

As a result, the Open edX "micro-frontend" architecture focused on creating an unopinionated, loosely coupled set of applications with the goal of enabling teams to iterate quickly and independently. This goal was successful.

> However, now roughly 6 years into this gradual re-platforming, we've discovered that the completely siloed nature of these MFEs has created its own set of problems.  Our frontends are more like independent single-page applications than micro-frontends, as we never invested in ways of composing them together. The problems inherent in today's MFE architecture are described below.

Reviewer 6: Are there canonical definitions of SPAs and MFEs that you're implicitly referring to here? If so may be worth linking out to a page that defines & explains each concept.

Reviewer: From: https://micro-frontends.org/

> The idea behind Micro Frontends is to think about a website or web app as **a composition of features**

The emphasis is not even mine.  Can't think of a better thing to link to.

Author: 👍🏻  think I'll link out to that, thanks.

Reviewer 6: As per other comments, this is a place that footnotes or glossary may be useful to add this term. to.

> Consistency

Author: Thing is, frontend composability isn't going to address places where someone has chosen to make an MFE-specific component or follow some UX pattern not used elsewhere.  That's just a choice they made which we should have caught in some review process.

It can help with consistency between dependency versions, however, which is why this section focuses on the different kinds of dependency inconsistency.  I'm trying hard to keep the Motivation section limited to stuff we're actually addressing with these changes so it doesn't become a laundry list of our MFE gripes. 😄

> Consistency

Reviewer 4: > frontend composability isn't going to address places where someone has chosen to make an MFE-specific component

In the case of the header I think it does. Having the header and footer live on the shell instead of in the MFE discourages that type of change

> I'm trying hard to keep the Motivation section limited to stuff we're actually addressing with these changes so it doesn't become a laundry list of our MFE gripes. 😄

:100:

> Consistency

Author: I'm with ya.  I've reworked this section a smidge to point out that inconsistency can result from varying versions, but also because developers have more leeway to make divergent choices, and then added examples in the sub-sections.

===========

> Because each MFE is completely independent, this can create inconsistencies from MFE to MFE.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Because each MFE is completely independent, this can create inconsistencies in installed dependencies from MFE to MFE.
```

Take it or leave it, but I think that's what you mean.

Author: Making the change in my own commit so I don't pollute the commit history with Github's merges without conventional commit prefixes. :)

Reusable components (Paragon)
-----------------------------

MFEs may use different versions of ``@openedx/paragon``, resulting in functional and stylistic differences.

Header/Footer
-------------

MFEs may use different versions of ``@edx/frontend-component-header`` and ``@edx/frontend-component-footer``, also resulting in functional, stylistic, and content/navigation differences.

Branding
--------

Brand packages created from ``@openedx/brand-openedx`` may be different versions, resulting in any number of subtle visual differences.

> Other Dependencies

Reviewer 8: I don't think it is due to paragon or another dependency, but a visual difference that I notice a lot in different MFEs is the width of the page. If that could be solved through this effort it would also aid in consistency of the whole frontend.

Author: Great point - and I think having a shell app helps with this, which would be great to mention in here!  Going to work that into the section.

------------------

> MFEs may have completely different versions of any other dependency. We mitigate some of this by consolidating some important dependencies in ``@openedx/frontend-build`` and ``@edx/frontend-platform``, but even those can have different versions from MFE to MFE. For developers, this increases cognitive load and slows velocity because of the need to adjust to the idiosyncracies of each application.

Reviewer 6: `@edx/frontend-platform` hasn't migrated to `@openedx`?

Reviewer 6: In general I'm a bit wary of coding in very specific dependency package names within the OEP. What if we change those names in the future, or deprecate a specific package? What if we move the `component-*` packages under `@openedx`? Will we remember, in these cases, to update the OEP?

Reviewer 3: We could just say `frontend-build` and `frontend-platform` for the purposes of this OEP, and I think it's clear what those are.

Reviewer 6: One somewhat-future proof thing we could do would be to have the text link to something (a repo, an npm package?) that will auto-forward if we do change the name. I am a frontend baby so I don't know if npm would do the right thing

Reviewer 4: The way we've handled this on npm has been by updating the README. For example: https://www.npmjs.com/package/@edx/paragon still exists, but when you go there you see
> ## Warning: Package Moved
> While the Paragon design system will continue to receive updates, these updates will no longer be published at the @edx/paragon NPM package. Instead, the latest versions can be found with @openedx/paragon instead.

Author: ... Yeah, frontend-platform is still `@edx`.  This fact bugged me.  

I'm less concerned with us changing the naming scheme of our frontend repos; how often do we actually rename packages that have been around a while?  Optimizing for that feels excessive, IMHO. 

But maybe I should remove the org prefix from everything and make them links to the repository.  x_x

Reviewer 6: I think I agree that "optimizing for that feels excessive", but I like the idea of making the name a link to npm or github.

User and Developer Experience
=============================

Bundle Size
-----------

Each MFE bundles all of its own dependencies, even if they're the same version as another MFE. This means that as a user navigates between MFEs, they end up downloading the same set of common dependencies over and over again. This can result in megabytes of overhead for the average user navigating between a few MFEs, and slows down the entire experience.

Full Page Refreshes
-------------------

Each MFE has its own index.html page, and needs to load all its own dependencies from scratch whenever you navigate to it. This means that the browser performs a full page refresh each time a user transfers from MFE to MFE.

Build time
----------

> Each MFE must bundle all its own dependencies at build time, creating significant overhead for the Webpack build process. When building multiple MFEs, this additional, repeated overhead adds up quickly, making builds prohibitively slow.

Reviewer 6: Are you discussing developer time, operator/release time, or both? I'm reading this with an eye to establishing which personas currently experience difficulties in the current regime

Reviewer: Both developers and operators are affected by this, as any change to anything in an MFE requires a Webpack rebuild.  But while developers only have to deal with this one MFE at a time - presumably the one they're developing at a given moment - operators have it worse: whenever they want a change in a specific MFE, they have to rebuild all of them.  (At least the way Tutor does things now.)

Reviewer 6: Great, that's what I thought.

```suggestion
Each MFE must bundle all its own dependencies at build time, creating significant overhead for the Webpack build process. When building multiple MFEs, this additional, repeated overhead adds up quickly, making builds for operators as well as developers prohibitively slow.
```

Dependency Maintenance
----------------------

Since each MFE has its own complete set of dependencies, the overhead of keeping them all up to date can be overwhelming. Security patches, bug fixes, new features, and breaking changes all add up and create a significant maintenance burden.

Composability
=============

> We have no clean, low-overhead way of composing components from multiple MFEs into a single page, or extending an MFE with additional functionality.

Reviewer 6: what does mean "extending an MFE with additional functionality"? You discuss for sure composing components, and " show different *versions* of MFEs to different users", but not this extending case

Reviewer: This is the plugin case.  We intend to use the same mechanism to fetch plugins at browser runtime than we do MFEs.

Reviewer 6: Oh gotcha, I read this section a bit wrong. Duh.

The reality of MFEs is that while each application may represent a cohesive domain or bounded context, sometimes you need content and functionality from more than one domain on the page at the same time.

> Alternately, providers may want to show different *versions* of MFEs to different users while keeping the rest of the app (header, navigation, other MFEs) unchanged.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Alternately, site operators may want to show different *versions* of MFEs to different users while keeping the rest of the app (header, navigation, other MFEs) unchanged.
```

> We aren't without options here, but what we have today has its own issues. It's worth walking through what we have today.

Reviewer 6: Again I'm wary of "today" - an OEP seeks to be a living document, driving our architecture for years to come. I would expect to, in 3 years, point a new dev to the frontend to this document to learn about composibility, and I find language like "today" or "currently" to work against that goal. I'm not sure how to suggest a rewording, what's your intention behind including it? How could we adapt that to the next few sections ("Current Option")?

Author: Gotcha... I'm going to do a general pass with an eye toward today-ness.  Rather than talking about "MFEs today", we should be talking about "Siloed MFEs" or some such, I think, talking about the architecture without talking about it being 'current'.

Shared Libraries (Current Option #1)
------------------------------------

> Because each MFE is siloed from each other - both in repositories and at runtime - our only viable mechanism for sharing code has historically been to extract it into a shared library that gets bundled with each at build time. This creates more repository/dependency overhead.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Because each MFE is siloed from each other - both in repositories and at runtime - our only viable mechanism for sharing code has historically been to extract it into a shared library that gets bundled with each MFE at build time. This creates more repository/dependency overhead.
```
Will be easier for ESL to follow this

Build-time package overrides (Current Option #2)
------------------------------------------------

> NPM and package.json allow operators to override dependency resolution by installing an alternate version of a dependency prior to build time. This has historically been how we've allowed operators to override the header, footer, and brand.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
NPM and package.json allow site operators to override dependency resolution by installing an alternate version of a dependency prior to build time. This has historically been how we've allowed operators to override the header, footer, and brand.
```
just to be glaringly obvious

> The system is confusing, somewhat brittle, and only works at build time. If an operator needs different headers/footers/brands for different clients, we've just multiplied the number of builds they need to do (already a problem even without this - see the "Build time" issue above!)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The system is confusing, somewhat brittle, and only works at build time. If a site operator needs different headers/footers/brands for different clients, we've just multiplied the number of builds they need to do (already a problem even without this - see the "Build time" issue above!)
```
Is "client" the right word to use? That describes a _way of running your business_ rather than a way of running your site. What's the technical term for what a site operator is doing when they desire to do this? Sorry I clearly don't devops

Reviewer 4: Maybe "if a site operator is managing multiple instances with custom header/footer/brand requirements, we've just multiplied..."

Reviewer 8: We use `open edx instance` or just `instance` to refer to what I think is meant by client here. A client as part of a business might even have many instances.

Reviewer 6: As discussed in chat with David, another possible term to incorporate here could be "multi-tenant"/"multi-tenancy"

Reviewer 6: If that is a goal it should definitely be explicitly stated!

Author: I had a conversation with @felipemontoya the other day where he encouraged me _not_ to worry about multi-tenancy as a core goal of this. 😄  I think we can simplify this by saying "instances" instead of "clients" as he suggests, which removes the "business" language.

Frontend Plugins (Current Option #3)
------------------------------------

With the creation of the `frontend-plugin-framework <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-plugin-framework>`_, we're starting to have the capability to share components across MFEs as plugins, either at build time (direct plugins) or runtime (iframe plugins)

> Direct plugins create some flexibility, but couple our repositories' builds together. Iframes are good for sandboxing and isolating code, but they're a very inefficient way to compose a UI, especially given the consistency and UX/DX concerns raised above. In a way, they exacerbate the problem even more. There's no way to do direct plugins via the MFE config API, since they rely on importing modules directly into the build.

Reviewer 6: `couple our repositories' builds together.` -> who is "our" in this case?

and, in example 742 of why I hate soft wraps, I have to ask a completely different question in the same thread - what is DX?

Reviewer 4: > what is DX?

Developer experience. This seems to be the only place in the OEP where UX is used instead of spelling out user experience, might be worth just spelling out both.

Reviewer 6: Ah, I'm used to "DevExp" or "DevX" in our community. Kyle says "DevX"

Author: Avoiding the problem by spelling them both out as Brian suggests. 😂

Specification
*************

> Fundamentally, enabling runtime module loading and shared dependencies address the majority of these problems, so our approach centers on enabling these two things.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Fundamentally, runtime module loading and shared dependencies address the majority of these problems, so our approach centers on enabling these two things.
```
idk why use enable twice?

Author: Thanks, good improvements.

Runtime Module Loading
======================

The capability to lazily load content from independently built modules into the page - without iframes - solves a few of the issues mentioned above. In particular, it gives us a way of composing UI elements from different MFEs/Domains dynamically at runtime without a "host" application needing to know anything about the "guest" at build-time. The two remain completely decoupled, save some shared runtime configuration.

> This capability has a high degree of overlap with the goals of the `frontend-plugin-framework <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-plugin-framework>`_ (FPF), and was the inspiration and approach for the original POC for that framework. We expect that the FPF would add a new plugin type - probably "module plugin" - which handles loading plugins via runtime module loading.

Author: You're right - the speculative text won't make much sense to future readers.  Hmm.  The goal of this was to point out that runtime module loading fits in naturally with FPF, and that the implementation of runtime module loading probably gets added to FPF.  I think I'll edit this down to remove the fun fact history lesson and remove the last sentence entirely.  This entire note probably belongs in the approach/reference implementation sections.

> This capability has a high degree of overlap with the goals of the `frontend-plugin-framework <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-plugin-framework>`_ (FPF), and was the inspiration and approach for the original POC for that framework. We expect that the FPF would add a new plugin type - probably "module plugin" - which handles loading plugins via runtime module loading.

Reviewer 6: You could flip it a bit, to explain how the FPF historically built on runtime module loading and also was kind of a defacto POC of the approach's usefulness to the Open edX ecosystem (if that's true?), like, "The FPF was inspired by runtime module loading's capability to lazily load content from independently built modules into the page without iframes."

> This capability has a high degree of overlap with the goals of the `frontend-plugin-framework <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-plugin-framework>`_ (FPF), and was the inspiration and approach for the original POC for that framework. We expect that the FPF would add a new plugin type - probably "module plugin" - which handles loading plugins via runtime module loading.

Author: I've re-written this and simplified it to say that it dovetails nicely with FPF (in more words).  There are more details on FPF further down in the Ref Impl section.

Runtime module loading advantages
---------------------------------

- Reduces the frequency of full page refreshes. MFEs today are completely independent, so navigating between them means loading a completely new page (even if they share dependencies).

> - Improves composability across MFEs/domains. We have no way to show more than one MFE on the same page today except by using iframes or by creating hard dependencies between MFEs at build-time by extracting 'shared' code into a new library, like `frontend-component-header <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-component-header>`_, `frontend-component-footer <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-component-footer>`_, or `frontend-lib-content-components <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-lib-content-components>`_, which increases our dependency maintenance burden significantly.

Reviewer 6: is this a fair clarification?
```suggestion
- Improves composability across MFEs/domains. We have no way to show more than one MFE on the same page today except by using iframes or by creating hard dependencies between MFEs at build-time by extracting 'shared' code into a new library, like `frontend-component-header <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-component-header>`_, `frontend-component-footer <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-component-footer>`_, or `frontend-lib-content-components <https://github.com/openedx/frontend-lib-content-components>`_ and explicitly including that code within any MFE that needs it. This increases our dependency maintenance burden significantly.
```

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 20 50

   * - **Package**
     - **Estimated Size**
     - **Notes**
   * - @edx/brand
     - Variable
     -
   * - @edx/frontend-component-footer
     - 88.1k
     -
   * - @edx/frontend-component-header
     - 156.9k
     -
   * - @edx/frontend-platform
     - 355.3k
     -
   * - @openedx/paragon
     - ~950k
     - bundlephobia.com threw an error on the Paragon build, but we expect it's the largest package here.
   * - classnames
     - 0.8k
     -
   * - core-js
     - 241.1k
     -
   * - prop-types
     - 0.9k
     -
   * - react
     - 6.4k
     -
   * - react-dom
     - 130.2k
     -
   * - react-redux
     - 11.2k
     -
   * - react-router
     - 58.9k
     -
   * - react-router-dom
     - 77.1k
     -
   * - redux
     - 3.7k
     - Ultimately should be replaced with @reduxjs/toolkit. This document isn't making a judgment on the utility of redux, just noting that it is currently in use in the vast majority of MFEs.
   * - regenerator-runtime
     - 6.6k
     -

Total size: ~2,087.2k unzipped

Shared dependency advantages
----------------------------

> - Encourages runtime consistency across all types of dependencies. If our MFEs use the same version, we significantly reduce the cognitive load and context switching involved in working with multiple MFEs, cut down on visual inconsistencies at runtime, etc.

Reviewer 4: The use of "encourages" instead of "enforces" here seems intentional. I know we don't want to dive into the "you can use different versions of a dependency on different MFEs within the same shell (assuming the dependencies aren't singletons) but you won't get the benefits of shared dependencies" rabbit hole here as that is covered quite well later in the OEP, but when first reading this section I see "***Encourages*** runtime consistency..." and "***If*** our MFEs use the same version..." and feel like I'm missing a piece of the puzzle.

I don't have any thoughts on how to best foreshadow that (hopefully someone else does?)

Reviewer 6: "When MFEs use the same version of a given dependency (runtime consistency), we see many benefits: significant reduction of developer cognitive load and context switching involved in working with multiple MFEs, fewer visual inconsistencies at runtime, and more. However, it will still be possible for MFEs to choose to use a different version of a dependency, which will be discussed in more detail later in this section."

How does that sound @brian-smith-tcril ?

Reviewer 4: That sounds great! We probably don't even need the the part with "runtime consistency" in parens there.

Author: I like it - I replaced the last sentence with a link down to the "Approach" section which gets into the deets of what shared dependencies really means, and how it works (and what it takes to _enforce_ it. 😁).

> - Reduces runtime bundle size. We'll ship far less code to the client across a user's browsing session.

Reviewer 6: [curious] is this at all quantifiable, even by a rough percentage range?

This means their build has to take time to bundle them, and the repository still needs the dependencies present in the package.json file.  Sharing dependencies doesn't help us much w/r/t build time and dependency maintenance.

Approach
========

We intend to enable runtime module loading and shared dependencies via `Webpack module federation <https://webpack.js.org/concepts/module-federation>`_. More information on module federation beyond its webpack implementation can be found on its `dedicated site at module-federation.io <https://module-federation.io/>`_.

Further, we believe that we also need an approach to maintaining and enforcing dependency consistency across MFEs to realize the benefits of shared dependencies. MFEs need a compatible version of the shared dependency to be available, otherwise they need to fall back to their own version. The process, tooling, and/or code organization necessary to provide that consistency is not something module federation can help with and needs to be addressed separately.

Module Federation
-----------------

> Module federation is implemented as a `plugin for Webpack <https://webpack.js.org/plugins/module-federation-plugin/>`_ that enables micro-frontends to be composed into the same page at runtime even if they're built separately and independently deployed. The pieces being composed are "modules". It lets us configure which dependencies should be shared between modules on a page and what modules a particular frontend exposes to be loaded by other frontends.

Reviewer 6: [frontend-baby question] is `module` here just a webpack-y term for what we call MFEs? Or put another way, would there be `modules` in the Open edX ecosystem that _weren't_ MFEs?

Reviewer 6: I think that would be a good addition, as a glossary entry or footnote. I like what we did with [OEP-55](https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/blob/master/oeps/processes/oep-0055-proc-project-maintainers.rst) with footnotes.

But maybe my question still stands - is an MFE itself a module? could it be multiple modules? Could we (and would we want to) compose non-MFE modules?

If two modules require incompatible versions of a shared dependency, the second one loaded can fall back to loading a version it's compatible with from its own build. (see the link in step #4 below for details.)

In terms of Open edX MFEs, this means:

1. MFEs can continue to be built independently.
2. The Webpack build will include a manifest of which sub-modules the MFE provides at runtime.
3. ``@openedx/frontend-build`` will specify - through its Webpack configs - a common set of shared dependencies to be used at runtime by all MFEs.
4. Webpack will intelligently resolve those dependencies at runtime, `taking into account each module's specific version requirements <https://www.angulararchitects.io/en/blog/getting-out-of-version-mismatch-hell-with-module-federation>`_.
5. MFEs can dynamically load modules from other MFEs at runtime with Webpack handling hooking them up to the right dependencies.

Because we already use Webpack, the work to add the ModuleFederationPlugin to our configurations is small and uninvasive (see proof of concept in the `Reference Implementation`_ section below).

Maintaining Dependency Consistency
----------------------------------

> This proposal fundamentally changes how we work with MFE dependencies, and will require us to adopt a more rigorous approach to ensuring dependency consistency and compatiblity. That consistency doesn't come for free just by adopting shared dependencies at runtime: independent codebases will need to be kept in sync.

Reviewer 4: It's not clear to me what "independent codebases" is referring to in this context. Different MFEs within the Open edX GH org? Forks made by operators? Both?

Reviewer 6: fwiw I read this as "different `openedx/frontend-*` repositories". I would think operators of forks would have the ability to make their own decisions about upgrading dependencies, given a fallback mechanism for dependency resolution is in place so (probably?) nothing will break? Sounds like there's a chance it could anyway. 

This is probably a case where we ensure the `frontend-*` repos within the openedx org get proper upgrades at named release time, and we have comprehensive operator release notes that describe what is changed.

Reviewer 4: Ah, that makes sense. In that case I'd think 

> That consistency doesn't come for free just by adopting shared dependencies at runtime:

may not be strong enough language. With MFEs as completely separate single page applications, we can use different versions of dependencies and nothing will *break*, but that can lead to the previously mentioned inconsistencies. With MFEs as modules inside a shared shell application, using different versions of singleton dependencies could break things.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This proposal fundamentally changes how we work with MFE dependencies, and will require us to adopt a more rigorous approach to ensuring dependency consistency and compatibility. Independent codebases must be kept in sync with regards to dependencies; consistency doesn't come for free just by adopting shared dependencies at runtime.
```

@brian-smith-tcril is this a good suggestion based on our convo?
@davidjoy - is this correct? 😅

Reviewer 4: This looks great! Impressive how much clearer it is when the "must be kept in sync" part comes first.

Author: Yes - I've incorporated that in, and clarified that the 'codebases' we're talking about are MFE codebases.

> We expect that this may need to take a number of possible forms.

Reviewer 6: Language concern: this is an OEP, fundamental foundational guiding document. It should serve as a guide to How We Do Things. "We propose", "this should happen", "we need a process", etc doesn't feel like language for an OEP. I'd prefer stuff that's in flux point at a more mutatable document, such as a wiki page, where we can iterate and change quickly and eventually update the oep (or add an ADR) with This Is How We Do Things. But honestly, an OEP can very much just assert how process needs to change! Like a blueprint for the thing we're building, that isn't built yet. That may require making changes in other places (other OEPs, ADRs, wiki pages, documentation pages), and that's fine.

For example the Process section below could say:

Maintainers and developers require a way of knowing what dependency versions to use and when they need to upgrade to stay consistent. Thus, Open edX release documentation must include documentation of which frontend dependency versions are compatible with the release, likely pinned to a major version (i.e., React 17.x, Paragon 22.x, etc.).

Following the process defined in  the `Upgrade Project Runbook <https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AC/pages/3660316693/Upgrade+Project+Runbook>`_, core repositories (as defined by OEP-57, Core Product) will be migrated through breaking changes in third-party dependencies.

--

That will require updates to the Upgrade Project Runbook, probably some BTR documentation, maybe other stuff. That's great. We should assert the new process in this doc, where - crucially - the community can debate and agree upon it, and then make it happen!

Process
^^^^^^^

We need to ensure maintainers and developers know what dependency versions to use, and when they need to upgrade to stay consistent. Open edX release documentation should include documentation of which frontend dependency versions are compatible with the release, likely pinned to a major version (i.e., React 17.x, Paragon 22.x, etc.)

We also need a process to migrate core repositories through breaking changes in third-party dependencies. Ideally follow the `Upgrade Project Runbook <https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AC/pages/3660316693/Upgrade+Project+Runbook>`_.

Best Practices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We need to ensure we minimize breaking changes in our own libraries (such as Paragon, the header, footer, frontend-platform, frontend-build, etc.) We suggest accomplishing this by:

- Creating new versions of components with breaking changes (``ButtonV2``, ``webpack.dev.config.v2.js``) rather than modifying existing ones.
- Leveraging the DEPR process for communication and removing old component versions
- Aligning that removal and the subsequent breaking changes with Open edX releases, and documenting it in their release notes.

> Further, we could reduce the overhead of dependency maintenance and ensure MFEs stay up to date by pinning dependencies to major versions using ``^`` on versions in our package.json files.

Reviewer 6: Is this a recommendation? Are we following this? Or is this thinking out loud?

Reviewer 4: *I* have been doing this when updating dependencies but I still see quite a bit of exact dependency pins making it in. Might be something we should make an ADR under https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-proposals/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0067-bp-tools-and-technology.html

Reviewer 6: Yeah, this sounds to me like a good practice that we should just codify and follow.

Tooling
^^^^^^^

Maintainers and developers should be warned of incompatibilities created by their PRs, or outside the repository by another project (such as the shell).

> This could take the form of Github tooling which notifies maintainers and developers that their frontend code has:

Reviewer 6: In the spirit of "let's not hypothesize, let's actually write a guiding doc", I think it would be good to check with @feanil if using GitHub tooling would be the right way to achieve this goal - let's finalize this doc asserting the way we are actually planning to achieve this goal, we can always update if that ends up being a bad time.

Reviewer 6: Agree!

To minimize impact on our MFEs, this library may need to be supported with some build-time configuration in Webpack that aliases its passthrough imports to their original package names. This would let us continue to write:

  ``import React from 'react';``

Instead of having to write something like:

  ``import React from '@openedx/<passthrough library name>/react';``

or:

  ``import { React } from '@openedx/<passthrough library name>';``

Out of Scope
============

There are a few important - but tangental - concerns which are considered out of scope for this OEP and its resulting reference implementation.

- Implementation details of how module federation would be added in the frontend-plugin-framework.
- How Tutor and other distributions will need to change to adopt module federation.
- Opinions on which dependencies we should adopt going forward (such as redux or other state management solutions)

Rationale
*********

> The majority of the concerns expressed in the Motivation section revolve around a lack of shared dependencies and the way in which MFEs are currently siloed from each other, preventing us from creating a more seamless, cohesive experience.

Reviewer 6: > seamless, cohesive experience

user exp, dev exp, or both?

Module federation specifically addresses these use cases exactly. It's right-sized to the problem at hand, can be accomplished with a minimum of impact on our existing MFEs, and can be done in a backwards compatible way (more on that below).

> An approach to maintaining dependency consistency is essential to realize the benefits of sharing dependencies, or we've accomplished very little even though we've added the capability. An approach to providing this consistency is not a prerequisite for implementing module federation, to be clear, but the `success` of module federation is tightly coupled to it.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
An approach to maintaining dependency consistency is essential to realize the benefits of sharing dependencies, or we've accomplished very little even though we've added the capability. An approach to providing this consistency is not a prerequisite for implementing module federation, to be clear, but the _success_ of module federation is tightly coupled to it.
```

Backward Compatibility
**********************

> We intend to maintain backwards compatibility while migrating to using module federation. We can do this by creating a separate set of Webpack configurations in ``@openedx/frontend-build`` and separate build targets in converted MFEs; the footprint of module federation on "guest" MFEs is very small, requiring virtually no code changes in the application itself, and a few additional configuration options in the MFE's Webpack config to identify exposed components.

Reviewer 6: can you define the term `guest MFE` a little bit here?

Hosts and Guests
----------------

MFEs become either "hosts" or "guests" or both. A host is an MFE that loads runtime modules from a guest. A guest may itself act as a host to modules from another guest.

Shell MFE
---------

We will create a new "shell" MFE to act as the top-level host for all other MFEs. It is exclusively responsible for:

- Initializing the application via ``@edx/frontend-platform``.
- Loading the base, expected version of all our shared dependencies.
- Rendering the "layout" of the application, including the header and footer.
- Loading the brand.

Like other hosts, it is also responsible for:

- Loading all the manifests from the "guest" MFEs it intends to load.
- Using module federation to load the guest MFEs on demand.

Guest MFEs (not the shell)
--------------------------

> Guest MFEs that require a version of a shared dependency that's incompatible with the shell's version may load their own, provided that dependency isn't a singleton (like ``react`` or ``@edx/frontend-platform``). Singletons may only be loaded once because they break if they're loaded more than once on a single page.

Reviewer 6: [I'm a frontend baby] is "singleton" a commonly known/consistently defined word in this context for all frontend devs?

Reviewer: Reasonably so, yes, but it might be worth including a link to a Wikipedia entry, or something.  Like:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern

Reviewer 6: Another great place for a footnote

Author: I've added a definition of singleton in the doc.  It's more of a class of dependencies that want to be the only instance loaded, more-so than dependencies that follow a singleton pattern in an object oriented programming sense.

Guests loading their own versions of shared dependencies degrades the performance and experience of end users. MFE authors should endeavor to use dependencies compatible with the version loaded by the shell. If we use a passthrough library of shared dependencies, this becomes easier.

> Converting the POC to a reference implementation

Reviewer 6: This feels like it should definitely be a living document. There are robust comments, questions, and suggestions in the comments for each of the line items that shouldn't be lost - and discussion should continue, past when this OEP is merged.

We need a mechanism to provide shared dependencies and composable frontends that can fit in with our existing ecosystem. Adopting Piral would likely involve significant refactoring of existing MFEs to fit into its framework and to turn them into "pilets", which locks us in to the Piral way of doing things.

It feels like our needs more closely align with the narrower scope of module federation, and that it's a more right-sized solution to our architectural problems.

Combining MFEs into 2-3 monoliths
=================================

Folding our micro-frontends together into a few larger frontends (LMS and Studio, for instance) solves our need for shared dependencies in a different way - it just shares all the code so there's one set of dependencies for all of it. We could continue to rely on frontend-plugin-framework for cross-domain plugins, but "plugins" within the larger domain become a simple import from another part of the application.

> This approach was abandoned because we still believe that MFE independence is a core need for our platform, and we can't go back to a few monolithic frontends.

Reviewer 6: Could you expand here, why do we still believe? Development efficiency, fast deployment? One thing that hasn't been brought up but occurs to me, is that we're able to grant much more granular merge rights (via teh Core Contributor Program) to specific areas of developer expertise - as opposed to the reality that you can ask 10 different CCs to edx-platform to review a change, and none of them know the code area!

Reviewer: There are a couple of reasons of pretty important reasons:

* Maintain the reduced need for cross-team development coordination that we got from moving to MFEs in the first  place 
* Continue giving operators the option of building and deploying MFEs independently, if their pipeline allows it (Tutor currently doesn't), thus making for far less cumbersome operations

Reviewer 6: Yeah, I wasn't actually questioning this :) I agree with the line, I just think it would be more powerful to support with a couple reasons why. I do see our codebase as being more approachable by newbies when they only have to dive into a tiny subset of the overall codebase.

Author: I expanded on the reasoning a little using what you both have said here. :)

Appendix A: How Module Federation Works
***************************************

Without reproducing the details of Webpack's module federation documentation, effectively the following steps occur:

- A host application is provided a list of remote entry points, either through build-time configuration or via an API request to a runtime configuration service (like the MFE config API).
- Each guest application has a "remote entry" JavaScript file which acts as a manifest of the modules that application exposes, each of which is its own JavaScript file. The guest's versions of all of its dependencies are also present in the manifest.
- The host application loads those remote entry points as scripts to the document's <head> tag for later use.
- To load a module, the host application loads the module's JavaScript file based on the URL in the remote entry file, and Webpack's runtime provides that module with any shared dependencies already loaded in the host application.
- If the Webpack runtime can't reconcile the version of a dependency needed by a guest module with those already loaded, it will use the remote entry manifest to load the guest's version as well.

> Change History

Reviewer 6: Two notes: (1) Please put the most recent update first; (2) No need to make updates while a PR is under review, because the discussion history can be traced in the PR. See eg https://github.com/openedx/open-edx-proposals/blob/master/oeps/processes/oep-0054-core-contributors.rst change history.

Author: Do we want to "squash" the change log entries since the beginning?  I'd been adding them (and duplicating it in the commit messages) so folks could see what changed, but am happy to clean it up.
